Sonnets
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/shakespeares-sonnets/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.0.1




1

From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
But, as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory.
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be--
  To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

2

When forty winters shall besiege thy brow
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held.
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use
If thou couldst answer "This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,"
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
  This were to be new made when thou art old
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

3

Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time.
  But if thou live remembered not to be,
  Die single, and thine image dies with thee.

4

Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank, she lends to those are free.
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
For, having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which used lives th' executor to be.

5

Those hours that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
Will play the tyrants to the very same
And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness everywhere.
Then, were not summer's distillation left
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
  But flowers distilled, though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.

6

Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled.
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed.
That use is not forbidden usury
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
That's for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one.
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee;
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-willed, for thou art much too fair
  To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

7

Lo, in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage.
But when from highmost pitch with weary car
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
From his low tract and look another way.
  So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon,
  Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.

8

Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing;
  Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee: "Thou single wilt prove none."

9

Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
That thou consum'st thyself in single life?
Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
The world will be thy widow and still weep
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep,
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind.
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And, kept unused, the user so destroys it.
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

10

For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none lov'st is most evident.
For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind.
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove.
  Make thee another self for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

11

As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
Without this, folly, age, and cold decay.
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
And threescore year would make the world away.
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish;
Look whom she best endowed she gave the more,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish.
  She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

12

When I do count the clock that tells the time
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
When I behold the violet past prime
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white;
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard;
Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And die as fast as they see others grow;
  And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defense
  Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

13

O, that you were your self! But, love, you are
No longer yours than you yourself here live;
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination; then you were
Your self again after yourself's decease
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honor might uphold
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
  O, none but unthrifts, dear my love, you know.
  You had a father; let your son say so.

14

Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck,
And yet methinks I have astronomy--
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert;
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
  Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.

15

When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the selfsame sky,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
  And, all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

16

But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time,
And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit.
So should the lines of life that life repair
Which this time's pencil or my pupil pen
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
  To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
  And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

17

Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say "This poet lies;
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces."
So should my papers, yellowed with their age,
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be termed a poet's rage
And stretched meter of an antique song.
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice--in it and in my rhyme.

18

Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimmed.
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall Death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st.
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

19

Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws
And make the Earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets.
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet do thy worst, old Time; despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.

20

A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue all hues in his controlling,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till Nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
  Mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure.

21

So is it not with me as with that muse
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a couplement of proud compare
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
With April's firstborn flowers and all things rare
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
O, let me, true in love, but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother's child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fixed in heaven's air.
  Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

22

My glass shall not persuade me I am old
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
But when in thee Time's furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me;
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
As I not for myself but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain.
  Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

23

As an unperfect actor on the stage
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
So I for fear of trust forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might.
O, let my books be then the eloquence
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love and look for recompense
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
  O, learn to read what silent love hath writ.
  To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

24

Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
And perspective it is best painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill
To find where your true image pictured lies,
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, wherethrough the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee.
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art:
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

25

Let those who are in favor with their stars
Of public honor and proud titles boast,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Unlooked for joy in that I honor most.
Great princes' favorites their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for worth,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honor razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.
  Then happy I, that love and am beloved
  Where I may not remove nor be removed.

26

Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
To thee I send this written embassage
To witness duty, not to show my wit;
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it;
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect.
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.

27

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired,
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind when body's work's expired.
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see;
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which like a jewel hung in ghastly night
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
  Lo, thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee and for myself no quiet find.

28

How can I then return in happy plight
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night and night by day oppressed;
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee?
I tell the day to please him thou art bright
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven;
So flatter I the swart complexioned night,
When sparkling stars twire not, thou gild'st the even.
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.

29

When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
  For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

30

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste;
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And weep afresh love's long since canceled woe,
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
  All losses are restored and sorrows end.

31

Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
That due of many now is thine alone.
  Their images I loved I view in thee,
  And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.

32

If thou survive my well-contented day
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
And shalt by fortune once more resurvey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
"Had my friend's muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought
To march in ranks of better equipage.
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."

33

Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace.
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all-triumphant splendor on my brow,
But, out alack, he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
  Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
  Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.

34

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace.
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss.
Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offense's cross.
  Ah, but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.

35

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done.
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Myself corrupting salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are.
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence.
Such civil war is in my love and hate
  That I an accessary needs must be
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.

36

Let me confess that we two must be twain
Although our undivided loves are one;
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honor me
Unless thou take that honor from thy name.
  But do not so. I love thee in such sort
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

37

As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store.
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
That I in thy abundance am sufficed
And by a part of all thy glory live.
  Look what is best, that best I wish in thee.
  This wish I have, then ten times happy me.

38

How can my muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks if aught in me
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.

39

O, how thy worth with manners may I sing
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring,
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this let us divided live
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.

40

Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all.
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then, if for my love thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
But yet be blamed if thou thyself deceivest
By willful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robb'ry, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.

41

Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won;
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
  Hers, by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.

42

That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
Thou dost love her because thou know'st I love her,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross.
  But here's the joy: my friend and I are one;
  Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.

43

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee
And, darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
To the clear day with thy much clearer light
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.

44

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
For then, despite of space, I would be brought
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But, ah, thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that, so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend time's leisure with my moan;
  Receiving nought by elements so slow
  But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.

45

The other two, slight air and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy;
Until life's composition be recured
By those swift messengers returned from thee,
Who even but now come back again, assured
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
  This told, I joy; but then, no longer glad,
  I send them back again and straight grow sad.

46

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
How to divide the conquest of thy sight.
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To 'cide this title is impaneled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eyes' moiety and the dear heart's part,
  As thus: mine eyes' due is thy outward part,
  And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.

47

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other.
When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
So, either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself away are present still with me;
For thou no farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them, and they with thee;
  Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.

48

How careful was I, when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of dearest and mine only care
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
  And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.

49

Against that time, if ever that time come,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
Whenas thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Called to that audit by advised respects;
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand against myself uprear
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part.
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love I can allege no cause.

50

How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
"Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend."
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee.
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind:
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.

51

Thus can my love excuse the slow offense
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
In winged speed no motion shall I know.
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race.
But love for love thus shall excuse my jade:
  "Since from thee going he went willful slow,
  Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go."

52

So am I as the rich whose blessed key
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not ev'ry hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since seldom coming in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide
To make some special instant special blessed
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had, to triumph, being lacked, to hope.

53

What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since everyone hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
Speak of the spring and foison of the year;
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you, for constant heart.

54

O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odor which doth in it live.
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses;
But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odors made.
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall vade, by verse distils your truth.

55

Not marble nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

56

Sweet love, renew thy force. Be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but today by feeding is allayed,
Tomorrow sharpened in his former might.
So, love, be thou. Although today thou fill
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
Tomorrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
Let this sad int'rim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore where two contracted new
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Return of love, more blessed may be the view.
  Or call it winter, which being full of care
  Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.

57

Being your slave, what should I do but tend
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend
Nor services to do till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save where you are how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love that in your will,
  Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.

58

That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
That you yourself may privilege your time
To what you will; to you it doth belong
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
  Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.

59

If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which, laboring for invention, bear amiss
The second burden of a former child.
O, that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done,
That I might see what the old world could say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether we are mended, or whe'er better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
  O, sure I am the wits of former days
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.

60

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before;
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
Feeds on the rarities of Nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

61

Is it thy will thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?
O, no. Thy love, though much, is not so great.
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
  For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.

62

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
And all my soul and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And for myself mine own worth do define
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed
Beated and chopped with tanned antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
  'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.

63

Against my love shall be, as I am now,
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn;
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
Hath traveled on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.

64

When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the wat'ry main,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded to decay,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
  But weep to have that which it fears to lose.

65

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
O, fearful meditation! Where, alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O, none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

66

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry:
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honor shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.

67

Ah, wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve
And lace itself with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now Nature bankrout is,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains?
  O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
  In days long since, before these last so bad.

68

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were borne,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchers, were shorn away
To live a second life on second head,
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay.
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Making no summer of another's green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new.
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false art what beauty was of yore.

69

Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend.
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
Utt'ring bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds.
  But why thy odor matcheth not thy show,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.

70

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair.
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
Thy worth the greater, being wooed of time,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Either not assailed, or victor being charged;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged.
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

71

No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell.
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it, for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I, perhaps, compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay,
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan
  And mock you with me after I am gone.

72

O, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in me that you should love,
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I
Than niggard truth would willingly impart.
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

73

That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
  This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long.

74

But be contented when that fell arrest
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
The very part was consecrate to thee.
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
My spirit is thine, the better part of me.
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
  The worth of that is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.

75

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found:
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure.
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look;
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.

76

Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument;
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent.
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love, still telling what is told.

77

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste:
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.

78

So oft have I invoked thee for my muse
And found such fair assistance in my verse
As every alien pen hath got my use
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee.
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
  But thou art all my art and dost advance
  As high as learning my rude ignorance.

79

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
And my sick muse doth give another place.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek. He can afford
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.

80

O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
On your broad main doth willfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
Or, being wracked, I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building and of goodly pride.
  Then, if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this: my love was my decay.

81

Or I shall live your epitaph to make
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten.
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die.
The Earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'erread;
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse
When all the breathers of this world are dead.
  You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

82

I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
And do so, love; yet when they have devised
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou, truly fair, wert truly sympathized
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend.
  And their gross painting might be better used
  Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.

83

I never saw that you did painting need
And therefore to your fair no painting set.
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
The barren tender of a poet's debt.
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself, being extant, well might show
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb,
For I impair not beauty, being mute,
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.

84

Who is it that says most, which can say more
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you,
In whose confine immured is the store
Which should example where your equal grew?
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired everywhere.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.

85

My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill
And precious phrase by all the muses filed.
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen
To every hymn that able spirit affords
In polished form of well-refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say "'Tis so, 'tis true,"
And to the most of praise add something more;
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
  Then others for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.

86

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of all-too-precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
  But when your countenance filled up his line,
  Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.

87

Farewell, thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate.
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
  Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

88

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults concealed wherein I am attainted,
That thou, in losing me, shall win much glory;
And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to myself I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That, for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.

89

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offense;
Speak of my lameness and I straight will halt,
Against thy reasons making no defense.
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As I'll myself disgrace, knowing thy will;
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee, against myself I'll vow debate,
  For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.

90

Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an afterloss.
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come; so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might;
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.

91

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
Some in their garments, though newfangled ill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
And every humor hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest.
But these particulars are not my measure;
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
  All this away, and me most wretched make.

92

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs
When in the least of them my life hath end;
I see a better state to me belongs
Than that which on thy humor doth depend.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O, what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.

93

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
May still seem love to me, though altered new;
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye;
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many's looks, the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.

94

They that have power to hurt and will do none,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense;
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to itself it only live and die;
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity.
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.

95

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
  Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
  The hardest knife ill used doth lose his edge.

96

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport.
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a throned queen
The basest jewel will be well esteemed,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated and for true things deemed.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so. I love thee in such sort
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

97

How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen,
What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease.
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans and unfathered fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute;
  Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.

98

From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim,
Hath put a spirit of youth in everything,
That heavy Saturn laughed and leapt with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odor and in hue
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seemed it winter still, and, you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play.

99

The forward violet thus did I chide:
"Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed."
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
And to his robb'ry had annexed thy breath;
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker ate him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see
  But sweet or color it had stol'n from thee.

100

Where art thou, muse, that thou forget'st so long
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Dark'ning thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return, forgetful muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise, resty muse; my love's sweet face survey
If Time have any wrinkle graven there.
If any, be a satire to decay
And make Time's spoils despised everywhere.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
  So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.

101

O truant muse, what shall be thy amends
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer, muse. Wilt thou not haply say
"Truth needs no color with his color fixed,
Beauty no pencil beauty's truth to lay;
But best is best if never intermixed"?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for 't lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office, muse; I teach thee how
  To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

102

My love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming;
I love not less, though less the show appear.
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming
The owner's tongue doth publish everywhere.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
And stops his pipe in growth of riper days.
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burdens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore, like her, I sometime hold my tongue,
  Because I would not dull you with my song.

103

Alack, what poverty my muse brings forth,
That, having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
O, blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
That overgoes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful, then, striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
  And more, much more, than in my verse can sit
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it.

104

To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Ah, yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
  For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred:
  Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.

105

Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love today, tomorrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse, to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
"Fair, kind, and true" is all my argument,
"Fair, kind, and true," varying to other words;
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  "Fair," "kind," and "true" have often lived alone,
  Which three till now never kept seat in one.

106

When in the chronicle of wasted time
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And, for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing.
  For we, which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

107

Not mine own fears nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes;
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument
  When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.

108

What's in the brain that ink may character
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
What's new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
I must each day say o'er the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.

109

O, never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify;
As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie.
That is my home of love. If I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reigned
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good.
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.

110

Alas, 'tis true, I have gone here and there
And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offenses of affections new.
Most true it is that I have looked on truth
Askance and strangely; but by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end.
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.

111

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand;
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand.
Pity me, then, and wish I were renewed,
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
  Pity me, then, dear friend, and I assure ye
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.

112

Your love and pity doth th' impression fill
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow;
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'ergreen my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices that my adder's sense
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.

113

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which governs me to go about
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch.
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favor or deformed'st creature,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine eye untrue.

114

Or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you,
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
O, 'tis the first: 'tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up.
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
  If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

115

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer;
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Divert strong minds to th' course of alt'ring things--
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Might I not then say "Now I love you best,"
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe. Then might I not say so,
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow.

116

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O, no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
  If this be error, and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

117

Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchased right;
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my willfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate,
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.

118

Like as to make our appetites more keen
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
As to prevent our maladies unseen
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love, t' anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured.
  But thence I learn, and find the lesson true:
  Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.

119

What potions have I drunk of siren tears
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O, benefit of ill! Now I find true
That better is by evil still made better;
And ruined love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content,
  And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.

120

That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, you've passed a hell of time,
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O, that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you as you to me then tendered
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.

121

'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing.
For why should others' false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am; and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own.
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown,
  Unless this general evil they maintain:
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.

122

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date, even to eternity--
Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be missed.
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more.
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.

123

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change.
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wond'ring at the present nor the past;
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
  This I do vow, and this shall ever be:
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.

124

If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for fortune's bastard be unfathered,
As subject to time's love or to time's hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
No, it was builded far from accident;
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls.
It fears not policy, that heretic
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime.

125

Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honoring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor
Lose all and more by paying too much rent,
For compound sweet forgoing simple savor,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer; a true soul
  When most impeached stands least in thy control.

126

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
Thy lover's withering as thy sweet self grow'st.
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May Time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure.
Her audit, though delayed, answered must be,
And her quietus is to render thee.

127

In the old age, black was not counted fair,
Or, if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame.
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
Sland'ring creation with a false esteem.
  Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.

128

How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
To be so tickled they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.

129

Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and, till action, lust
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight;
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had,
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
A bliss in proof and proved a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
  All this the world well knows, yet none knows well
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

130

My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound.
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground.
  And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
  As any she belied with false compare.

131

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
One on another's neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander as I think proceeds.

132

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the gray cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face.
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.

133

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me.
Is 't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed;
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed.
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail.
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Thou canst not then use rigor in my jail.
  And yet thou wilt, for I, being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.

134

So, now I have confessed that he is thine
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still.
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
He learned but surety-like to write for me
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer that put'st forth all to use,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me.
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

135

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And will to boot, and will in overplus.
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou, being rich in will, add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill.
  Think all but one, and me in that one will.

136

If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy will,
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there.
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfill.
Will will fulfill the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy store's account I one must be.
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
That nothing me, a something, sweet, to thee.
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lovest me, for my name is Will.

137

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes
That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
If eyes, corrupt by overpartial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferred.

138

When my love swears that she is made of truth
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue;
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flattered be.

139

O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside.
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o'erpressed defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah, my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries.
  Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.

140

Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain,
Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so,
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee.
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

141

In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone.
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be.
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin awards me pain.

142

Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving.
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving.
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee;
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied.

143

Lo, as a careful huswife runs to catch
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face,
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I, thy babe, chase thee afar behind.
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me
And play the mother's part: kiss me, be kind.
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy will,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.

144

Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still.
The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman colored ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
But being both from me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell.
  Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

145

Those lips that Love's own hand did make
Breathed forth the sound that said "I hate"
To me that languished for her sake;
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Was used in giving gentle doom,
And taught it thus anew to greet:
"I hate" she altered with an end
That followed it as gentle day
Doth follow night, who, like a fiend,
From heaven to hell is flown away.
  "I hate" from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life, saying "not you."

146

Poor soul, the center of my sinful earth,
Pressed with these rebel powers that thee array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store.
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
  So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
  And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.

147

My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And, frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

148

O me, what eyes hath love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Love's eye is not so true as all men's "no."
How can it? O, how can love's eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view;
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
  O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.

149

Canst thou, O cruel, say I love thee not
When I against myself with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of myself, all, tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
What merit do I in myself respect
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
  Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.

150

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantise of skill
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O, though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee.

151

Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason.
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call
  Her "love," for whose dear love I rise and fall.

152

In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
  For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured eye,
  To swear against the truth so foul a lie.

153

Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep.
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground,
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And grew a seething bath which yet men prove
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired
And thither hied, a sad distempered guest,
  But found no cure. The bath for my help lies
  Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.

154

The little love-god, lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed;
And so the general of hot desire
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
  Came there for cure, and this by that I prove:
  Love's fire heats water; water cools not love.



Two Sonnets from The Passionate Pilgrim

The Passionate Pilgrime.
By W. Shakespeare.
London: for W. Iaggard, 1599.

These are the first versions of these two sonnets to be printed.


[138]

When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unskillful in the world's false forgeries.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although I know my years be past the best,
I, smiling, credit her false-speaking tongue,
Outfacing faults in love with love's ill rest.
But wherefore says my love that she is young?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, love's best habit is a soothing tongue,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I'll lie with love, and love with me,
  Since that our faults in love thus smothered be.
[sig. A 3]


[144]

Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
That like two spirits do suggest me still.
My better angel is a man right fair,
My worser spirit a woman colored ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her fair pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
For being both to me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell.
  The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
[sig. A 4]


Othello
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/othello/
Created on May 11, 2016, from FDT version 0.9.2.1

Characters in the Play
======================
OTHELLO, a Moorish general in the Venetian army
DESDEMONA, a Venetian lady
BRABANTIO, a Venetian senator, father to Desdemona
IAGO, Othello's standard-bearer, or "ancient"
EMILIA, Iago's wife and Desdemona's attendant
CASSIO, Othello's second-in-command, or lieutenant
RODERIGO, a Venetian gentleman
Duke of Venice
Venetian gentlemen, kinsmen to Brabantio:
  LODOVICO
  GRATIANO
Venetian senators
MONTANO, an official in Cyprus
BIANCA, a woman in Cyprus in love with Cassio
Clown, a comic servant to Othello and Desdemona
Gentlemen of Cyprus
Sailors
Servants, Attendants, Officers, Messengers, Herald, Musicians, Torchbearers.


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Roderigo and Iago.]


RODERIGO
Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.

IAGO  'Sblood, but you'll not hear me!
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.

RODERIGO
Thou toldst me thou didst hold him in thy hate.

IAGO  Despise me
If I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them with a bombast circumstance,
Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,
And in conclusion,
Nonsuits my mediators. For "Certes," says he,
"I have already chose my officer."
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost damned in a fair wife,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster--unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election;
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
Christened and heathen, must be beleed and
calmed
By debitor and creditor. This countercaster,
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I, God bless the mark, his Moorship's ancient.

RODERIGO
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

IAGO
Why, there's no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service.
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to th' first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affined
To love the Moor.

RODERIGO
I would not follow him, then.

IAGO  O, sir, content you.
I follow him to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
For naught but provender, and when he's old,
cashiered.
Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined
their coats,
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some
soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor I would not be Iago.
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.

RODERIGO
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe
If he can carry 't thus!

IAGO  Call up her father.
Rouse him. Make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on 't
As it may lose some color.

RODERIGO
Here is her father's house. I'll call aloud.

IAGO
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.

RODERIGO
What ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!

IAGO
Awake! What ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves, thieves!

[Enter Brabantio, above.]


BRABANTIO
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

RODERIGO
Signior, is all your family within?

IAGO
Are your doors locked?

BRABANTIO  Why, wherefore ask you this?

IAGO
Zounds, sir, you're robbed. For shame, put on your
gown!
Your heart is burst. You have lost half your soul.
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
Arise, I say!

BRABANTIO  What, have you lost your wits?

RODERIGO
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?

BRABANTIO  Not I. What are you?

RODERIGO
My name is Roderigo.

BRABANTIO  The worser welcome.
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness,
Being full of supper and distemp'ring draughts,
Upon malicious bravery dost thou come
To start my quiet.

RODERIGO  Sir, sir, sir--

BRABANTIO  But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.

RODERIGO
Patience, good sir.

BRABANTIO  What tell'st thou me of robbing?
This is Venice. My house is not a grange.

RODERIGO  Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you--

IAGO  Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not
serve God if the devil bid you. Because we come to
do you service and you think we are ruffians, you'll
have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse,
you'll have your nephews neigh to you, you'll have
coursers for cousins and jennets for germans.

BRABANTIO  What profane wretch art thou?

IAGO  I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter
and the Moor are now making the beast with
two backs.

BRABANTIO  Thou art a villain.

IAGO  You are a senator.

BRABANTIO
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.

RODERIGO
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
If 't be your pleasure and most wise consent--
As partly I find it is--that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor:
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all civility
I thus would play and trifle with your Reverence.
Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself.
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.

BRABANTIO  Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper. Call up all my people.
This accident is not unlike my dream.
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light!	[He exits.]

IAGO, [to Roderigo]  Farewell, for I must leave you.
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, as if I stay I shall,
Against the Moor. For I do know the state,
However this may gall him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he's embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Which even now stands in act, that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love--
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find
him,
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.	[He exits.]

[Enter Brabantio in his nightgown, with Servants and
Torches.]


BRABANTIO
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what's to come of my despised time
Is naught but bitterness.--Now, Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her?--O, unhappy girl!--
With the Moor, sayst thou?--Who would be a
father?--
How didst thou know 'twas she?--O, she deceives
me
Past thought!--What said she to you?--Get more
tapers.
Raise all my kindred.--Are they married, think
you?

RODERIGO  Truly, I think they are.

BRABANTIO
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
By what you see them act.--Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?

RODERIGO  Yes, sir, I have indeed.

BRABANTIO
Call up my brother.--O, would you had had her!--
Some one way, some another.--Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

RODERIGO
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard and go along with me.

BRABANTIO
Pray you lead on. At every house I'll call.
I may command at most.--Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of night.--
On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Othello, Iago, Attendants, with Torches.]


IAGO
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th' conscience
To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times
I had thought t' have yerked him here under the
ribs.

OTHELLO
'Tis better as it is.

IAGO  Nay, but he prated
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your Honor,
That with the little godliness I have
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the magnifico is much beloved,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the Duke's. He will divorce you
Or put upon you what restraint or grievance
The law (with all his might to enforce it on)
Will give him cable.

OTHELLO  Let him do his spite.
My services which I have done the signiory
Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know
(Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
I shall promulgate) I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege, and my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reached. For know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhoused free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea's worth. But look, what lights come
yond?

IAGO
Those are the raised father and his friends.
You were best go in.

OTHELLO  Not I. I must be found.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

IAGO  By Janus, I think no.

[Enter Cassio, with Officers, and Torches.]


OTHELLO
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant!
The goodness of the night upon you, friends.
What is the news?

CASSIO  The Duke does greet you, general,
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
Even on the instant.

OTHELLO  What is the matter, think you?

CASSIO
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another's heels,
And many of the Consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Duke's already. You have been hotly
called for.
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.

OTHELLO  'Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house
And go with you.	[He exits.]

CASSIO  Ancient, what makes he here?

IAGO
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.
If it prove lawful prize, he's made forever.

CASSIO
I do not understand.

IAGO  He's married.

CASSIO  To who?

IAGO
Marry, to--

[Reenter Othello.]

Come, captain, will you go?

OTHELLO  Have with you.

CASSIO
Here comes another troop to seek for you.

[Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, with Officers, and Torches.]


IAGO
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
He comes to bad intent.

OTHELLO  Holla, stand there!

RODERIGO
Signior, it is the Moor.

BRABANTIO  Down with him,
thief!
[They draw their swords.]

IAGO
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.

OTHELLO
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust
them.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.

BRABANTIO
O, thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my
daughter?
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her!
For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage that she shunned
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, t' incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou--to fear, not to delight!
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I'll have 't disputed on.
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practicer
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.--
Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.

OTHELLO  Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining and the rest.
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter.--Whither will you that I go
To answer this your charge?

BRABANTIO  To prison, till fit time
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.

OTHELLO  What if I do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?

OFFICER  'Tis true, most worthy signior.
The Duke's in council, and your noble self
I am sure is sent for.

BRABANTIO  How? The Duke in council?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own.
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Duke, Senators, and Officers.]


DUKE, [reading a paper]
There's no composition in these news
That gives them credit.

FIRST SENATOR, [reading a paper]
Indeed, they are disproportioned.
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.

DUKE
And mine, a hundred forty.

SECOND SENATOR, [reading a paper]
And mine, two hundred.
But though they jump not on a just account
(As in these cases, where the aim reports
'Tis oft with difference), yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

DUKE
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.
I do not so secure me in the error,
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.

SAILOR, [within]  What ho, what ho, what ho!

[Enter Sailor.]


OFFICER  A messenger from the galleys.

DUKE  Now, what's the business?

SAILOR
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes.
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.	[He exits.]

DUKE
How say you by this change?

FIRST SENATOR  This cannot be,
By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks th' abilities
That Rhodes is dressed in--if we make thought of
this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain
To wake and wage a danger profitless.

DUKE
Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.

OFFICER  Here is more news.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
The Ottomites, Reverend and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

FIRST SENATOR
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?

MESSENGER
Of thirty sail; and now they do restem
Their backward course, bearing with frank
appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.	[He exits.]

DUKE  'Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?

FIRST SENATOR
He's now in Florence.

DUKE  Write from us to him.
Post-post-haste. Dispatch.

FIRST SENATOR
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

[Enter Brabantio, Othello, Cassio, Iago, Roderigo, and
Officers.]


DUKE
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
[To Brabantio.] I did not see you. Welcome, gentle
signior.
We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.

BRABANTIO
So did I yours. Good your Grace, pardon me.
Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general
care
Take hold on me, for my particular grief
Is of so floodgate and o'erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows
And it is still itself.

DUKE  Why, what's the matter?

BRABANTIO
My daughter! O, my daughter!

FIRST SENATOR  Dead?

BRABANTIO  Ay, to me.
She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so prepost'rously to err--
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense--
Sans witchcraft could not.

DUKE
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,
After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.

BRABANTIO  Humbly I thank your Grace.
Here is the man--this Moor, whom now it seems
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.

ALL  We are very sorry for 't.

DUKE, [to Othello]
What, in your own part, can you say to this?

BRABANTIO  Nothing, but this is so.

OTHELLO
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approved good masters:
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
It is most true; true I have married her.
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle.
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious
patience,
I will a round unvarnished tale deliver
Of my whole course of love--what drugs, what
charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his daughter.

BRABANTIO  A maiden never bold,
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,
To fall in love with what she feared to look on!
It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
He wrought upon her.

DUKE  To vouch this is no proof
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

FIRST SENATOR  But, Othello, speak:
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?

OTHELLO  I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.

DUKE  Fetch Desdemona hither.

OTHELLO
Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
[Iago and Attendants exit.]
And till she come, as truly as to heaven
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I'll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love,
And she in mine.

DUKE  Say it, Othello.

OTHELLO
Her father loved me, oft invited me,
Still questioned me the story of my life
From year to year--the battles, sieges, fortunes
That I have passed.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To th' very moment that he bade me tell it,
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving accidents by flood and field,
Of hairbreadth 'scapes i' th' imminent deadly
breach,
Of being taken by the insolent foe
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,
And portance in my traveler's history,
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads
touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak--such was my process--
And of the cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. These things to
hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch
She'd come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I, observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing
strange,
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked
me,
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.
She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
And I loved her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have used.
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.

[Enter Desdemona, Iago, Attendants.]


DUKE
I think this tale would win my daughter, too.
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.

BRABANTIO  I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head if my bad blame
Light on the man.--Come hither, gentle mistress.
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?

DESDEMONA  My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty.
To you I am bound for life and education.
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you. You are the lord of duty.
I am hitherto your daughter. But here's my
husband.
And so much duty as my mother showed
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor my lord.

BRABANTIO  God be with you! I have done.
Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs.
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.--
Come hither, Moor.
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee.--For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.--I have done, my lord.

DUKE
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step may help these lovers
Into your favor.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mock'ry makes.
The robbed that smiles steals something from the
thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

BRABANTIO
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile.
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
But words are words. I never yet did hear
That the bruised heart was pierced through the
ear.
I humbly beseech you, proceed to th' affairs of
state.

DUKE  The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes
for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is
best known to you. And though we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a
sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
voice on you. You must therefore be content to
slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this
more stubborn and boist'rous expedition.

OTHELLO
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness, and do undertake
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.

DUKE
Why, at her father's.

BRABANTIO  I will not have it so.

OTHELLO  Nor I.

DESDEMONA  Nor would I there reside
To put my father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear
And let me find a charter in your voice
T' assist my simpleness.

DUKE  What would you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA
That I love the Moor to live with him
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
Even to the very quality of my lord.
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
And to his honors and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for why I love him are bereft me
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

OTHELLO  Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat (the young affects
In me defunct) and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
For she is with me. No, when light-winged toys
Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and officed instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation.

DUKE
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it.

FIRST SENATOR
You must away tonight.

OTHELLO  With all my
heart.

DUKE
At nine i' th' morning here we'll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind
And he shall our commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.

OTHELLO  So please your Grace, my
ancient.
A man he is of honesty and trust.
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.

DUKE  Let it be so.
Good night to everyone. [To Brabantio.] And, noble
signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

FIRST SENATOR
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.

BRABANTIO
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.
She has deceived her father, and may thee.	[He exits.]

OTHELLO
My life upon her faith!
[The Duke, the Senators, Cassio, and Officers exit.]
Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.--
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
[Othello and Desdemona exit.]

RODERIGO  Iago--

IAGO  What sayst thou, noble heart?

RODERIGO  What will I do, think'st thou?

IAGO  Why, go to bed and sleep.

RODERIGO  I will incontinently drown myself.

IAGO  If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why,
thou silly gentleman!

RODERIGO  It is silliness to live, when to live is torment,
and then have we a prescription to die when death is
our physician.

IAGO  O, villainous! I have looked upon the world for
four times seven years, and since I could distinguish
betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never found
man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say
I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I
would change my humanity with a baboon.

RODERIGO  What should I do? I confess it is my shame
to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.

IAGO  Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or
thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our
wills are gardeners. So that if we will plant nettles
or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme,
supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it
with many, either to have it sterile with idleness or
manured with industry, why the power and corrigible
authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance
of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise
another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our
natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous
conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging
motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts--
whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect, or
scion.

RODERIGO  It cannot be.

IAGO  It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission
of the will. Come, be a man! Drown thyself? Drown
cats and blind puppies. I have professed me thy
friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving
with cables of perdurable toughness. I could never
better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse.
Follow thou the wars; defeat thy favor with an
usurped beard. I say, put money in thy purse. It
cannot be that Desdemona should long continue
her love to the Moor--put money in thy purse--
nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement in
her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration
--put but money in thy purse. These Moors are
changeable in their wills. Fill thy purse with money.
The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts
shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida.
She must change for youth. When she is sated
with his body she will find the error of her choice.
Therefore, put money in thy purse. If thou wilt
needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than
drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony
and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian
and a supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my
wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her.
Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself!
It is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be
hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned
and go without her.

RODERIGO  Wilt thou be fast to my hopes if I depend on
the issue?

IAGO  Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have
told thee often, and I retell thee again and again, I
hate the Moor. My cause is hearted; thine hath no
less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge
against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost
thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many
events in the womb of time which will be delivered.
Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more
of this tomorrow. Adieu.

RODERIGO  Where shall we meet i' th' morning?

IAGO  At my lodging.

RODERIGO  I'll be with thee betimes.

IAGO  Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?

RODERIGO  What say you?

IAGO  No more of drowning, do you hear?

RODERIGO  I am changed.

IAGO  Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your
purse.

RODERIGO  I'll sell all my land.	[He exits.]

IAGO
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
'Has done my office. I know not if 't be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well.
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio's a proper man. Let me see now:
To get his place and to plume up my will
In double knavery--How? how?--Let's see.
After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose
To be suspected, framed to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by th' nose
As asses are.
I have 't. It is engendered. Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
[He exits.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.]


MONTANO
What from the cape can you discern at sea?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.
I cannot 'twixt the heaven and the main
Descry a sail.

MONTANO
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land.
A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements.
If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous
mane,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear
And quench the guards of th' ever-fixed pole.
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed flood.

MONTANO  If that the Turkish fleet
Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.
It is impossible to bear it out.

[Enter a third Gentleman.]


THIRD GENTLEMAN  News, lads! Our wars are done.
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.

MONTANO
How? Is this true?

THIRD GENTLEMAN  The ship is here put in,
A Veronesa. Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

MONTANO
I am glad on 't. 'Tis a worthy governor.

THIRD GENTLEMAN
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
And prays the Moor be safe, for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.

MONTANO  Pray heaven he be;
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho!
As well to see the vessel that's come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue
An indistinct regard.

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Come, let's do so;
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.

[Enter Cassio.]


CASSIO
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defense against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.

MONTANO  Is he well shipped?

CASSIO
His bark is stoutly timbered, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.
[Voices cry within. "A sail, a sail, a sail!"]

[Enter a Messenger.]


CASSIO  What noise?

MESSENGER
The town is empty; on the brow o' th' sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry "A sail!"

CASSIO
My hopes do shape him for the Governor.
[A shot.]

SECOND GENTLEMAN
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.
Our friends, at least.

CASSIO  I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  I shall.	[He exits.]

MONTANO
But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?

CASSIO
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in th' essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.

[Enter Second Gentleman.]

How now? Who has put in?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the General.

CASSIO
'Has had most favorable and happy speed!
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The guttered rocks and congregated sands
(Traitors ensteeped to clog the guiltless keel),
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

MONTANO  What is she?

CASSIO
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A sennight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort!

[Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia.]

O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
[He kneels.]
Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand
Enwheel thee round.	[He rises.]

DESDEMONA  I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell of my lord?

CASSIO
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he's well and will be shortly here.

DESDEMONA
O, but I fear--How lost you company?

CASSIO
The great contention of sea and skies
Parted our fellowship.
[Within "A sail, a sail!" A shot.]
But hark, a sail!

SECOND GENTLEMAN
They give their greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend.

CASSIO  See for the news.
[Second Gentleman exits.]
Good ancient, you are welcome. Welcome, mistress.
[He kisses Emilia.]
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

IAGO
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.

DESDEMONA
Alas, she has no speech!

IAGO  In faith, too much.
I find it still when I have list to sleep.
Marry, before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart
And chides with thinking.

EMILIA  You have little cause to say so.

IAGO  Come on, come on! You are pictures out of door,
bells in your parlors, wildcats in your kitchens,
saints in your injuries, devils being offended, players
in your huswifery, and huswives in your beds.

DESDEMONA  Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer.

IAGO
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

EMILIA
You shall not write my praise.

IAGO  No, let me not.

DESDEMONA
What wouldst write of me if thou shouldst praise
me?

IAGO
O, gentle lady, do not put me to 't,
For I am nothing if not critical.

DESDEMONA
Come on, assay.--There's one gone to the harbor?

IAGO  Ay, madam.

DESDEMONA, [aside]
I am not merry, but I do beguile
The thing I am by seeming otherwise.--
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

IAGO  I am about it, but indeed my invention comes
from my pate as birdlime does from frieze: it
plucks out brains and all. But my muse labors, and
thus she is delivered:
	If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
	The one's for use, the other useth it.

DESDEMONA
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?

IAGO
	If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
	She'll find a white that shall her blackness hit.

DESDEMONA
Worse and worse.

EMILIA  How if fair and foolish?

IAGO
	She never yet was foolish that was fair,
	For even her folly helped her to an heir.

DESDEMONA  These are old fond paradoxes to make
fools laugh i' th' alehouse. What miserable praise
hast thou for her that's foul and foolish?

IAGO
	There's none so foul and foolish thereunto,
	But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

DESDEMONA  O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the
worst best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on
a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority
of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very
malice itself?

IAGO
	She that was ever fair and never proud,
	Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
	Never lacked gold and yet went never gay,
	Fled from her wish, and yet said "Now I may,"
	She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,
	Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,
	She that in wisdom never was so frail
	To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail,
	She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,
	See suitors following and not look behind,
	She was a wight, if ever such wight were--

DESDEMONA  To do what?

IAGO
	To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

DESDEMONA  O, most lame and impotent conclusion!
--Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy
husband.--How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most
profane and liberal counselor?

CASSIO  He speaks home, madam. You may relish him
more in the soldier than in the scholar.
[Cassio takes Desdemona's hand.]

IAGO, [aside]  He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said,
whisper. With as little a web as this will I ensnare as
great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do. I will
gyve thee in thine own courtship. You say true, 'tis
so indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of
your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not
kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again
you are most apt to play the sir in. Very good; well
kissed; an excellent courtesy! 'Tis so, indeed. Yet
again your fingers to your lips? Would they were
clyster pipes for your sake!	[Trumpets within.]
The Moor. I know his trumpet.

CASSIO  'Tis truly so.

DESDEMONA  Let's meet him and receive him.

CASSIO  Lo, where he comes!

[Enter Othello and Attendants.]


OTHELLO
O, my fair warrior!

DESDEMONA  My dear Othello!

OTHELLO
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have wakened death,
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus high, and duck again as low
As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
'Twere now to be most happy, for I fear
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.

DESDEMONA  The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!

OTHELLO  Amen to that, sweet powers!
I cannot speak enough of this content.
It stops me here; it is too much of joy.	[They kiss.]
And this, and this, the greatest discords be
That e'er our hearts shall make!

IAGO, [aside]  O, you are well tuned now,
But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.

OTHELLO  Come. Let us to the castle.--
News, friends! Our wars are done. The Turks are
drowned.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?--
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus.
I have found great love amongst them. O, my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts.--I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel.
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.--Come, Desdemona.
Once more, well met at Cyprus.
[All but Iago and Roderigo exit.]

IAGO, [to a departing Attendant]  Do thou meet me presently
at the harbor. [To Roderigo.] Come hither. If
thou be'st valiant--as they say base men being in
love have then a nobility in their natures more than
is native to them--list me. The Lieutenant tonight
watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee
this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.

RODERIGO  With him? Why, 'tis not possible.

IAGO  Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.
Mark me with what violence she first loved the
Moor but for bragging and telling her fantastical
lies. And will she love him still for prating? Let not
thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed. And
what delight shall she have to look on the devil?
When the blood is made dull with the act of sport,
there should be, again to inflame it and to give
satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy
in years, manners, and beauties, all which the Moor
is defective in. Now, for want of these required
conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself
abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and
abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it
and compel her to some second choice. Now, sir,
this granted--as it is a most pregnant and unforced
position--who stands so eminent in the degree of
this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no
further conscionable than in putting on the mere
form of civil and humane seeming for the better
compassing of his salt and most hidden loose
affection. Why, none, why, none! A slipper and
subtle knave, a finder-out of occasions, that has an
eye can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though
true advantage never present itself; a devilish knave!
Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all
those requisites in him that folly and green minds
look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the
woman hath found him already.

RODERIGO  I cannot believe that in her. She's full of
most blessed condition.

IAGO  Blessed fig's end! The wine she drinks is made of
grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never
have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou
not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst
not mark that?

RODERIGO  Yes, that I did. But that was but courtesy.

IAGO  Lechery, by this hand! An index and obscure
prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts.
They met so near with their lips that their breaths
embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo!
When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard
at hand comes the master and main exercise, th'
incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled
by me. I have brought you from Venice. Watch you
tonight. For the command, I'll lay 't upon you.
Cassio knows you not. I'll not be far from you. Do
you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by
speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from
what other course you please, which the time shall
more favorably minister.

RODERIGO  Well.

IAGO  Sir, he's rash and very sudden in choler, and
haply may strike at you. Provoke him that he may,
for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to
mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no
true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by
the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the
impediment most profitably removed, without the
which there were no expectation of our prosperity.

RODERIGO  I will do this, if you can bring it to any
opportunity.

IAGO  I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I
must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.

RODERIGO  Adieu.	[He exits.]

IAGO
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe 't.
That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit.
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my revenge
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leaped into my seat--the thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am evened with him, wife for wife,
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
(For I fear Cassio with my nightcap too),
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused.
Knavery's plain face is never seen till used.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Othello's Herald with a proclamation.]


HERALD  It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant
general, that upon certain tidings now arrived,
importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,
every man put himself into triumph: some to
dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what
sport and revels his addition leads him. For besides
these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed
All offices are open, and there is full
liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till
the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of
Cyprus and our noble general, Othello!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.]


OTHELLO
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
Let's teach ourselves that honorable stop
Not to outsport discretion.

CASSIO
Iago hath direction what to do,
But notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Will I look to 't.

OTHELLO  Iago is most honest.
Michael, goodnight. Tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you. [To Desdemona.] Come,
my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.--
Goodnight.
[Othello and Desdemona exit, with Attendants.]

[Enter Iago.]


CASSIO
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.

IAGO  Not this hour, lieutenant. 'Tis not yet ten o' th'
clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of
his Desdemona--who let us not therefore blame;
he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and
she is sport for Jove.

CASSIO  She's a most exquisite lady.

IAGO  And, I'll warrant her, full of game.

CASSIO  Indeed, she's a most fresh and delicate
creature.

IAGO  What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley
to provocation.

CASSIO  An inviting eye, and yet methinks right
modest.

IAGO  And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?

CASSIO  She is indeed perfection.

IAGO  Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant,
I have a stoup of wine; and here without are a
brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a
measure to the health of black Othello.

CASSIO  Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and
unhappy brains for drinking. I could well wish
courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.

IAGO  O, they are our friends! But one cup; I'll drink
for you.

CASSIO  I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was
craftily qualified too, and behold what innovation it
makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity and
dare not task my weakness with any more.

IAGO  What, man! 'Tis a night of revels. The gallants
desire it.

CASSIO  Where are they?

IAGO  Here at the door. I pray you, call them in.

CASSIO  I'll do 't, but it dislikes me.	[He exits.]

IAGO
If I can fasten but one cup upon him
With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
He'll be as full of quarrel and offense
As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool
Roderigo,
Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits
That hold their honors in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups;
And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of
drunkards
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come.
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely both with wind and stream.

[Enter Cassio, Montano, and Gentlemen, followed by
Servants with wine.]


CASSIO  'Fore God, they have given me a rouse
already.

MONTANO  Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I
am a soldier.

IAGO  Some wine, ho!
[Sings.]	And let me the cannikin clink, clink,
	And let me the cannikin clink.
	   A soldier's a man,
	   O, man's life's but a span,
	Why, then, let a soldier drink.
Some wine, boys!

CASSIO  'Fore God, an excellent song.

IAGO  I learned it in England, where indeed they are
most potent in potting. Your Dane, your German,
and your swag-bellied Hollander--drink, ho!--are
nothing to your English.

CASSIO  Is your Englishman so exquisite in his
drinking?

IAGO  Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane
dead drunk. He sweats not to overthrow your Almain.
He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next
pottle can be filled.

CASSIO  To the health of our general!

MONTANO  I am for it, lieutenant, and I'll do you
justice.

IAGO  O sweet England!
[Sings.]	King Stephen was and-a worthy peer,
	   His breeches cost him but a crown;
	He held them sixpence all too dear;
	   With that he called the tailor lown.
	He was a wight of high renown,
	   And thou art but of low degree;
	'Tis pride that pulls the country down,
	   Then take thy auld cloak about thee.
Some wine, ho!

CASSIO  'Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than
the other!

IAGO  Will you hear 't again?

CASSIO  No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place
that does those things. Well, God's above all; and
there be souls must be saved, and there be souls
must not be saved.

IAGO  It's true, good lieutenant.

CASSIO  For mine own part--no offense to the General,
nor any man of quality--I hope to be saved.

IAGO  And so do I too, lieutenant.

CASSIO  Ay, but, by your leave, not before me. The
Lieutenant is to be saved before the Ancient. Let's
have no more of this. Let's to our affairs. God
forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let's look to our
business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This
is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my
left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough,
and I speak well enough.

GENTLEMEN  Excellent well.

CASSIO  Why, very well then. You must not think then
that I am drunk.	[He exits.]

MONTANO
To th' platform, masters. Come, let's set the watch.
[Gentlemen exit.]

IAGO, [to Montano]
You see this fellow that is gone before?
He's a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction; and do but see his vice.
'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.

MONTANO  But is he often thus?

IAGO
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.
He'll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.

MONTANO  It were well
The General were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?

[Enter Roderigo.]


IAGO, [aside to Roderigo]  How now, Roderigo?
I pray you, after the Lieutenant, go.
[Roderigo exits.]

MONTANO
And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an engraffed infirmity.
It were an honest action to say so
To the Moor.

IAGO  Not I, for this fair island.
I do love Cassio well and would do much
To cure him of this evil--	["Help, help!" within.]
But hark! What noise?

[Enter Cassio, pursuing Roderigo.]


CASSIO  Zounds, you rogue, you rascal!

MONTANO  What's the matter, lieutenant?

CASSIO  A knave teach me my duty? I'll beat the knave
into a twiggen bottle.

RODERIGO  Beat me?

CASSIO  Dost thou prate, rogue?	[He hits Roderigo.]

MONTANO  Nay, good lieutenant. I pray you, sir, hold
your hand.

CASSIO  Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the
mazard.

MONTANO  Come, come, you're drunk.

CASSIO  Drunk?
[They fight.]

IAGO, [aside to Roderigo]
Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny.
[Roderigo exits.]
Nay, good lieutenant.--God's will, gentlemen!--
Help, ho! Lieutenant--sir--Montano--sir--
Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed!
[A bell is rung.]
Who's that which rings the bell? Diablo, ho!
The town will rise. God's will, lieutenant, hold!
You will be shamed forever.

[Enter Othello and Attendants.]


OTHELLO
What is the matter here?

MONTANO  Zounds, I bleed
still.
I am hurt to th' death. He dies!	[He attacks Cassio.]

OTHELLO  Hold, for your lives!

IAGO
Hold, ho! Lieutenant--sir--Montano--
gentlemen--
Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
Hold! The General speaks to you. Hold, for shame!

OTHELLO
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?
Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl!
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell. It frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak. Who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.

IAGO
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,
In quarter and in terms like bride and groom
Divesting them for bed; and then but now,
As if some planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds,
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!

OTHELLO
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?

CASSIO
I pray you pardon me; I cannot speak.

OTHELLO
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.

MONTANO
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer Iago can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends
me,
Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
By me that's said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.

OTHELLO  Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on;
And he that is approved in this offense,
Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What, in a town of war
Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began 't?

MONTANO
If partially affined, or leagued in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.

IAGO  Touch me not so near.
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
[Pointing to Montano.]
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamor--as it so fell out--
The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose, and I returned the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords
And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
I ne'er might say before. When I came back--
For this was brief--I found them close together
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
From him that fled some strange indignity
Which patience could not pass.

OTHELLO  I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio.--Cassio, I love thee,
But nevermore be officer of mine.

[Enter Desdemona attended.]

Look if my gentle love be not raised up!
I'll make thee an example.

DESDEMONA
What is the matter, dear?

OTHELLO  All's well now,
sweeting.
Come away to bed. [To Montano.] Sir, for your hurts,
Myself will be your surgeon.--Lead him off.
[Montano is led off.]
Iago, look with care about the town
And silence those whom this vile brawl
distracted.--
Come, Desdemona. 'Tis the soldier's life
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
[All but Iago and Cassio exit.]

IAGO  What, are you hurt, lieutenant?

CASSIO  Ay, past all surgery.

IAGO  Marry, God forbid!

CASSIO  Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have
lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of
myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation,
Iago, my reputation!

IAGO  As I am an honest man, I thought you had
received some bodily wound. There is more sense
in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle and
most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost
without deserving. You have lost no reputation at
all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. What,
man, there are ways to recover the General again!
You are but now cast in his mood--a punishment
more in policy than in malice, even so as one would
beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious
lion. Sue to him again and he's yours.

CASSIO  I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive
so good a commander with so slight, so drunken,
and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk? And speak
parrot? And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse
fustian with one's own shadow? O thou
invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be
known by, let us call thee devil!

IAGO  What was he that you followed with your sword?
What had he done to you?

CASSIO  I know not.

IAGO  Is 't possible?

CASSIO  I remember a mass of things, but nothing
distinctly; a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O
God, that men should put an enemy in their
mouths to steal away their brains! That we should
with joy, pleasance, revel, and applause transform
ourselves into beasts!

IAGO  Why, but you are now well enough. How came
you thus recovered?

CASSIO  It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give
place to the devil wrath. One unperfectness shows
me another, to make me frankly despise myself.

IAGO  Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time,
the place, and the condition of this country stands,
I could heartily wish this had not so befallen. But
since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.

CASSIO  I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell
me I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as
Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be
now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently
a beast! O, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed,
and the ingredient is a devil.

IAGO  Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature,
if it be well used. Exclaim no more against it.
And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.

CASSIO  I have well approved it, sir.--I drunk!

IAGO  You or any man living may be drunk at a time,
man. I'll tell you what you shall do. Our general's
wife is now the general: I may say so in this
respect, for that he hath devoted and given up
himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
of her parts and graces. Confess yourself
freely to her. Importune her help to put you in your
place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so
blessed a disposition she holds it a vice in her
goodness not to do more than she is requested. This
broken joint between you and her husband entreat
her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay
worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow
stronger than it was before.

CASSIO  You advise me well.

IAGO  I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest
kindness.

CASSIO  I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I
will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake
for me. I am desperate of my fortunes if they check
me here.

IAGO  You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant. I
must to the watch.

CASSIO  Good night, honest Iago.	[Cassio exits.]

IAGO
And what's he, then, that says I play the villain,
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit. She's framed as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor--were 't to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin--
His soul is so enfettered to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now. For whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I'll pour this pestilence into his ear:
That she repeals him for her body's lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.

[Enter Roderigo.]

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO  I do follow here in the chase, not like a
hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My
money is almost spent, I have been tonight exceedingly
well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I
shall have so much experience for my pains, and so,
with no money at all and a little more wit, return
again to Venice.

IAGO
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Does 't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashiered Cassio.
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself awhile. By th' Mass, 'tis morning!
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
Away, I say! Thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone.	[Roderigo exits.]
Two things are to be done.
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.
I'll set her on.
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way.
Dull not device by coldness and delay.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Cassio with Musicians.]


CASSIO
Masters, play here (I will content your pains)
Something that's brief; and bid "Good morrow,
general."	[They play.]

[Enter the Clown.]


CLOWN  Why masters, have your instruments been in
Naples, that they speak i' th' nose thus?

MUSICIAN  How, sir, how?

CLOWN  Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?

MUSICIAN  Ay, marry, are they, sir.

CLOWN  O, thereby hangs a tail.

MUSICIAN  Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

CLOWN  Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I
know. But, masters, here's money for you; and the
General so likes your music that he desires you, for
love's sake, to make no more noise with it.

MUSICIAN  Well, sir, we will not.

CLOWN  If you have any music that may not be heard, to
't again. But, as they say, to hear music the General
does not greatly care.

MUSICIAN  We have none such, sir.

CLOWN  Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll
away. Go, vanish into air, away!

[Musicians exit.]

CASSIO  Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?

CLOWN  No, I hear not your honest friend. I hear you.

CASSIO  Prithee, keep up thy quillets.	[Giving money.]
There's a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman
that attends the General's wife be stirring,
tell her there's one Cassio entreats her a little favor
of speech. Wilt thou do this?

CLOWN  She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall
seem to notify unto her.

CASSIO
Do, good my friend.	[Clown exits.]

[Enter Iago.]

In happy time, Iago.

IAGO  You have not been abed, then?

CASSIO  Why, no. The day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.

IAGO  I'll send her to you presently,
And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.

CASSIO
I humbly thank you for 't. [Iago exits.] I never
knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.

[Enter Emilia.]


EMILIA
Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he
loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.

CASSIO  Yet I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemon alone.

EMILIA  Pray you come in.
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

CASSIO  I am much bound to you.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.]


OTHELLO
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot
And by him do my duties to the Senate.
[He gives Iago some papers.]
That done, I will be walking on the works.
Repair there to me.

IAGO  Well, my good lord, I'll do 't.

OTHELLO
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see 't?

GENTLEMEN
We wait upon your Lordship.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia.]


DESDEMONA
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.

EMILIA
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.

DESDEMONA
O, that's an honest fellow! Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.

CASSIO  Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never anything but your true servant.

DESDEMONA
I know 't. I thank you. You do love my lord;
You have known him long; and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.

CASSIO  Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.

DESDEMONA
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest:
I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
I'll intermingle everything he does
With Cassio's suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.

[Enter Othello and Iago.]


EMILIA  Madam, here comes my lord.

CASSIO  Madam, I'll take my leave.

DESDEMONA  Why, stay, and hear me speak.

CASSIO
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.

DESDEMONA  Well, do your discretion.	[Cassio exits.]

IAGO
Ha, I like not that.

OTHELLO  What dost thou say?

IAGO
Nothing, my lord; or if--I know not what.

OTHELLO
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

IAGO
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it
That he would steal away so guiltylike,
Seeing your coming.

OTHELLO  I do believe 'twas he.

DESDEMONA  How now, my lord?
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

OTHELLO  Who is 't you mean?

DESDEMONA
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.

OTHELLO  Went he hence now?

DESDEMONA  Yes, faith, so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.

OTHELLO
Not now, sweet Desdemon. Some other time.

DESDEMONA
But shall 't be shortly?

OTHELLO  The sooner, sweet, for you.

DESDEMONA
Shall 't be tonight at supper?

OTHELLO  No, not tonight.

DESDEMONA  Tomorrow dinner, then?

OTHELLO  I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.

DESDEMONA
Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon or night; on Wednesday morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. In faith, he's penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason--
Save that, they say, the wars must make example
Out of her best--is not almost a fault
T' incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul
What you would ask me that I should deny,
Or stand so mamm'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta'en your part--to have so much to do
To bring him in! By 'r Lady, I could do much--

OTHELLO
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.

DESDEMONA  Why, this is not a boon!
'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.

OTHELLO  I will deny thee nothing!
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.

DESDEMONA
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.

OTHELLO
Farewell, my Desdemona. I'll come to thee straight.

DESDEMONA
Emilia, come.--Be as your fancies teach you.
Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
[Desdemona and Emilia exit.]

OTHELLO
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

IAGO  My noble lord--

OTHELLO
What dost thou say, Iago?

IAGO  Did Michael Cassio,
When you wooed my lady, know of your love?

OTHELLO
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?

IAGO
But for a satisfaction of my thought,
No further harm.

OTHELLO  Why of thy thought, Iago?

IAGO
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

OTHELLO
O yes, and went between us very oft.

IAGO  Indeed?

OTHELLO
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern'st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?

IAGO  Honest, my lord?

OTHELLO  Honest--ay, honest.

IAGO
My lord, for aught I know.

OTHELLO  What dost thou think?

IAGO  Think, my lord?

OTHELLO
"Think, my lord?" By heaven, thou echo'st me
As if there were some monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean
something.
I heard thee say even now, thou lik'st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou cried'st
"Indeed?"
And didst contract and purse thy brow together
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.

IAGO  My lord, you know I love you.

OTHELLO  I think thou dost;
And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty
And weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them
breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more.
For such things in a false, disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just,
They're close dilations working from the heart
That passion cannot rule.

IAGO  For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

OTHELLO
I think so too.

IAGO  Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!

OTHELLO  Certain, men should be what they seem.

IAGO
Why then, I think Cassio's an honest man.

OTHELLO  Nay, yet there's more in this.
I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of
thoughts
The worst of words.

IAGO  Good my lord, pardon me.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and
false--
As where's that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so
pure
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law days and in sessions sit
With meditations lawful?

OTHELLO
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think'st him wronged and mak'st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.

IAGO  I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess--
As, I confess, it is my nature's plague
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not--that your wisdom
From one that so imperfectly conceits
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

OTHELLO  What dost thou mean?

IAGO
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something,
nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to
thousands.
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.

OTHELLO  By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.

IAGO
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.

OTHELLO
Ha?

IAGO  O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
Who dotes, yet doubts; suspects, yet strongly loves!

OTHELLO  O misery!

IAGO
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good God, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!

OTHELLO  Why, why is this?
Think'st thou I'd make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No. To be once in doubt
Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well.
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
I'll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy.

IAGO
I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure.
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abused. Look to 't.
I know our country disposition well.
In Venice they do let God see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands. Their best
conscience
Is not to leave 't undone, but keep 't unknown.

OTHELLO  Dost thou say so?

IAGO
She did deceive her father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

OTHELLO  And so she did.

IAGO  Why, go to, then!
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
To seel her father's eyes up close as oak,
He thought 'twas witchcraft! But I am much to
blame.
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.

OTHELLO  I am bound to thee forever.

IAGO
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.

OTHELLO
Not a jot, not a jot.

IAGO  I' faith, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love. But I do see you're moved.
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.

OTHELLO  I will not.

IAGO  Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
As my thoughts aim not at. Cassio's my worthy
friend.
My lord, I see you're moved.

OTHELLO  No, not much moved.
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.

IAGO
Long live she so! And long live you to think so!

OTHELLO
And yet, how nature erring from itself--

IAGO
Ay, there's the point. As, to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposed matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends--
Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural--
But pardon me--I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms
And happily repent.

OTHELLO  Farewell, farewell!
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more.
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.

IAGO, [beginning to exit]  My lord, I take my leave.

OTHELLO
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

IAGO, [returning]
My lord, I would I might entreat your Honor
To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time.
Although 'tis fit that Cassio have his place--
For sure he fills it up with great ability--
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means.
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity.
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears--
As worthy cause I have to fear I am--
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor.

OTHELLO  Fear not my government.

IAGO  I once more take my leave.	[He exits.]

OTHELLO
This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities with a learned spirit
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
I'd whistle her off and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
Into the vale of years--yet that's not much--
She's gone, I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others' uses. Yet 'tis the plague of great ones;
Prerogatived are they less than the base.
'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Look where she comes.

[Enter Desdemona and Emilia.]

If she be false, heaven mocks itself!
I'll not believe 't.

DESDEMONA  How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.

OTHELLO  I am to blame.

DESDEMONA
Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well?

OTHELLO
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.

DESDEMONA
Faith, that's with watching. 'Twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard; within this hour
It will be well.

OTHELLO  Your napkin is too little.
Let it alone.	[The handkerchief falls, unnoticed.]
Come, I'll go in with you.

DESDEMONA
I am very sorry that you are not well.
[Othello and Desdemona exit.]

EMILIA, [picking up the handkerchief]
I am glad I have found this napkin.
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it. But she so loves the token
(For he conjured her she should ever keep it)
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out
And give 't Iago. What he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I.
I nothing but to please his fantasy.

[Enter Iago.]


IAGO  How now? What do you here alone?

EMILIA
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.

IAGO
You have a thing for me? It is a common thing--

EMILIA  Ha?

IAGO  To have a foolish wife.

EMILIA
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same handkerchief?

IAGO  What handkerchief?

EMILIA  What handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.

IAGO  Hast stol'n it from her?

EMILIA
No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
And to th' advantage I, being here, took 't up.
Look, here 'tis.

IAGO  A good wench! Give it me.

EMILIA
What will you do with 't, that you have been so
earnest
To have me filch it?

IAGO, [snatching it]  Why, what is that to you?

EMILIA
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give 't me again. Poor lady, she'll run mad
When she shall lack it.

IAGO  Be not acknown on 't.
I have use for it. Go, leave me.	[Emilia exits.]
I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison;
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood
Burn like the mines of sulfur.

[Enter Othello.]

I did say so.
Look where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owedst yesterday.

OTHELLO  Ha, ha, false to me?

IAGO
Why, how now, general? No more of that!

OTHELLO
Avaunt! Begone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
I swear 'tis better to be much abused
Than but to know 't a little.

IAGO  How now, my lord?

OTHELLO
What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
I saw 't not, thought it not; it harmed not me.
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and
merry.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n,
Let him not know 't, and he's not robbed at all.

IAGO  I am sorry to hear this.

OTHELLO
I had been happy if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, forever
Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars
That makes ambition virtue! O, farewell!
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
Th' immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!

IAGO  Is 't possible, my lord?

OTHELLO
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore!
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my waked wrath.

IAGO  Is 't come to this?

OTHELLO
Make me to see 't, or at the least so prove it
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!

IAGO  My noble lord--

OTHELLO
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more. Abandon all remorse;
On horror's head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all Earth amazed;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.

IAGO  O grace! O heaven forgive me!
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
God b' wi' you. Take mine office.--O wretched fool,
That liv'st to make thine honesty a vice!--
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world:
To be direct and honest is not safe.--
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offense.

OTHELLO  Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.

IAGO
I should be wise; for honesty's a fool
And loses that it works for.

OTHELLO  By the world,
I think my wife be honest and think she is not.
I think that thou art just and think thou art not.
I'll have some proof! Her name, that was as fresh
As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
I'll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!

IAGO
I see you are eaten up with passion.
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?

OTHELLO  Would? Nay, and I will.

IAGO
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,
Behold her topped?

OTHELLO  Death and damnation! O!

IAGO
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances
Which lead directly to the door of truth
Will give you satisfaction, you might have 't.

OTHELLO
Give me a living reason she's disloyal.

IAGO  I do not like the office,
But sith I am entered in this cause so far,
Pricked to 't by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth
I could not sleep. There are a kind of men
So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter
Their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio.
In sleep I heard him say "Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves."
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry "O sweet creature!" then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
O'er my thigh, and sighed, and kissed, and then
Cried "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"

OTHELLO
O monstrous! Monstrous!

IAGO  Nay, this was but his
dream.

OTHELLO
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

IAGO
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.

OTHELLO  I'll tear her all to pieces.

IAGO
Nay, but be wise. Yet we see nothing done.
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this:
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?

OTHELLO
I gave her such a one. 'Twas my first gift.

IAGO
I know not that; but such a handkerchief--
I am sure it was your wife's--did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

OTHELLO  If it be that--

IAGO
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

OTHELLO
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
'Tis gone.
Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For 'tis of aspics' tongues!

IAGO  Yet be content.

OTHELLO  O, blood, blood, blood!

IAGO
Patience, I say. Your mind perhaps may change.

OTHELLO
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. [He kneels.] Now by yond marble
heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow,
I here engage my words.

IAGO  Do not rise yet.	[Iago kneels.]
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart
To wronged Othello's service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.	[They rise.]

OTHELLO  I greet thy love
Not with vain thanks but with acceptance
bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to 't.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio's not alive.

IAGO  My friend is dead.
'Tis done at your request. But let her live.

OTHELLO  Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn
her!
Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.

IAGO  I am your own forever.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.]


DESDEMONA  Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant
Cassio lies?

CLOWN  I dare not say he lies anywhere.

DESDEMONA  Why, man?

CLOWN  He's a soldier, and for me to say a soldier lies,
'tis stabbing.

DESDEMONA  Go to! Where lodges he?

CLOWN  To tell you where he lodges is to tell you
where I lie.

DESDEMONA  Can anything be made of this?

CLOWN  I know not where he lodges; and for me to
devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies
there, were to lie in mine own throat.

DESDEMONA  Can you inquire him out, and be edified
by report?

CLOWN  I will catechize the world for him--that is,
make questions, and by them answer.

DESDEMONA  Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I
have moved my lord on his behalf and hope all will
be well.

CLOWN  To do this is within the compass of man's wit,
and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
[Clown exits.]

DESDEMONA
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?

EMILIA  I know not, madam.

DESDEMONA
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.

EMILIA  Is he not jealous?

DESDEMONA
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humors from him.

EMILIA  Look where he
comes.

[Enter Othello.]


DESDEMONA
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be called to him.--How is 't with you, my lord?

OTHELLO
Well, my good lady. [Aside.] O, hardness to
dissemble!--
How do you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA  Well, my good lord.

OTHELLO
Give me your hand. [He takes her hand.] This hand
is moist, my lady.

DESDEMONA
It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.

OTHELLO
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here's a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,
A frank one.

DESDEMONA  You may indeed say so,
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.

OTHELLO
A liberal hand! The hearts of old gave hands,
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

DESDEMONA
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.

OTHELLO  What promise, chuck?

DESDEMONA
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

OTHELLO
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.
Lend me thy handkerchief.

DESDEMONA  Here, my lord.

OTHELLO
That which I gave you.

DESDEMONA  I have it not about me.

OTHELLO  Not?

DESDEMONA  No, faith, my lord.

OTHELLO  That's a fault. That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give.
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept
it,
'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love. But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on 't,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose 't or give 't away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.

DESDEMONA  Is 't possible?

OTHELLO
'Tis true. There's magic in the web of it.
A sybil that had numbered in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sewed the work.
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy, which the skillful
Conserved of maidens' hearts.

DESDEMONA  I' faith, is 't true?

OTHELLO
Most veritable. Therefore, look to 't well.

DESDEMONA
Then would to God that I had never seen 't!

OTHELLO  Ha? Wherefore?

DESDEMONA
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?

OTHELLO
Is 't lost? Is 't gone? Speak, is 't out o' th' way?

DESDEMONA  Heaven bless us!

OTHELLO  Say you?

DESDEMONA
It is not lost, but what an if it were?

OTHELLO  How?

DESDEMONA  I say it is not lost.

OTHELLO  Fetch 't. Let me see 't!

DESDEMONA
Why, so I can. But I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you, let Cassio be received again.

OTHELLO
Fetch me the handkerchief! [Aside.] My mind
misgives.

DESDEMONA  Come, come.
You'll never meet a more sufficient man.

OTHELLO
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA  I pray, talk me of Cassio.

OTHELLOThe handkerchief!

DESDEMONA  A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love;
Shared dangers with you--

OTHELLO
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA  I' faith, you are to blame.

OTHELLO  Zounds!	[Othello exits.]

EMILIA  Is not this man jealous?

DESDEMONA  I ne'er saw this before.
Sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief!
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

EMILIA
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man.
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
They belch us.

[Enter Iago and Cassio.]

Look you--Cassio and my husband.

IAGO, [to Cassio]
There is no other way; 'tis she must do 't,
And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.

DESDEMONA
How now, good Cassio, what's the news with you?

CASSIO
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love
Whom I with all the office of my heart
Entirely honor. I would not be delayed.
If my offense be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past nor present sorrows
Nor purposed merit in futurity
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit.
So shall I clothe me in a forced content,
And shut myself up in some other course
To fortune's alms.

DESDEMONA  Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
My advocation is not now in tune.
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favor as in humor altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.

IAGO
Is my lord angry?

EMILIA  He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.

IAGO
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puffed his own brother--and is he angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There's matter in 't indeed if he be angry.

DESDEMONA
I prithee do so.	[He exits.]
Something, sure, of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so.
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was--unhandsome warrior as I am!--
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul.
But now I find I had suborned the witness,
And he's indicted falsely.

EMILIA  Pray heaven it be
State matters, as you think, and no conception
Nor no jealous toy concerning you.

DESDEMONA
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!

EMILIA
But jealous souls will not be answered so.
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they're jealous. It is a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.

DESDEMONA
Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!

EMILIA  Lady, amen.

DESDEMONA
I will go seek him.--Cassio, walk hereabout.
If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

CASSIO  I humbly thank your Ladyship.
[Desdemona and Emilia exit.]

[Enter Bianca.]


BIANCA
'Save you, friend Cassio!

CASSIO  What make you from
home?
How is 't with you, my most fair Bianca?
I' faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

BIANCA
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights,
Eightscore eight hours, and lovers' absent hours
More tedious than the dial eightscore times?
O weary reck'ning!

CASSIO  Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
[Giving her Desdemona's handkerchief.]
Take me this work out.

BIANCA  O, Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is 't come to this? Well, well.

CASSIO  Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some
remembrance.
No, by my faith, Bianca.

BIANCA  Why, whose is it?

CASSIO
I know not neither. I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well. Ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I would have it copied.
Take it, and do 't, and leave me for this time.

BIANCA  Leave you? Wherefore?

CASSIO
I do attend here on the General,
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me womaned.

BIANCA  Why, I pray you?

CASSIO  Not that I love you not.

BIANCA  But that you do not love me!
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.

CASSIO
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here. But I'll see you soon.

BIANCA
'Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Othello and Iago.]


IAGO
Will you think so?

OTHELLO  Think so, Iago?

IAGO  What,
To kiss in private?

OTHELLO  An unauthorized kiss!

IAGO
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

OTHELLO
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil!
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt
heaven.

IAGO
If they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief--

OTHELLO  What then?

IAGO
Why then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow 't on any man.

OTHELLO
She is protectress of her honor, too.
May she give that?

IAGO
Her honor is an essence that's not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not.
But for the handkerchief--

OTHELLO
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou saidst--O, it comes o'er my memory
As doth the raven o'er the infectious house,
Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.

IAGO
Ay, what of that?

OTHELLO  That's not so good now.

IAGO  What
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab)--

OTHELLO  Hath he said anything?

IAGO
He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
No more than he'll unswear.

OTHELLO  What hath he said?

IAGO
Faith, that he did--I know not what he did.

OTHELLO  What? What?

IAGO
Lie--

OTHELLO  With her?

IAGO  With her--on her--what you will.

OTHELLO  Lie with her? Lie on her? We say "lie on her"
when they belie her. Lie with her--Zounds, that's
fulsome! Handkerchief--confessions--handkerchief.
To confess and be hanged for his labor.
First to be hanged and then to confess--I tremble
at it. Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing
passion without some instruction. It is not
words that shakes me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and
lips--is 't possible? Confess--handkerchief--O,
devil!	[He falls in a trance.]

IAGO  Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are
caught,
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach.--What ho! My lord!
My lord, I say. Othello!

[Enter Cassio.]

How now, Cassio?

CASSIO  What's the matter?

IAGO
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.

CASSIO
Rub him about the temples.

IAGO  No, forbear.
The lethargy must have his quiet course.
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
Do you withdraw yourself a little while.
He will recover straight. When he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.
[Cassio exits.]
How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?

OTHELLO
Dost thou mock me?

IAGO  I mock you not, by heaven!
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!

OTHELLO
A horned man's a monster and a beast.

IAGO
There's many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.

OTHELLO
Did he confess it?

IAGO  Good sir, be a man!
Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
May draw with you. There's millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

OTHELLO  O, thou art wise, 'tis certain.

IAGO  Stand you awhile apart.
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here, o'erwhelmed with your grief--
A passion most unsuiting such a man--
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away
And laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns
That dwell in every region of his face.
For I will make him tell the tale anew--
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath and is again to cope your wife.
I say but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Or I shall say you're all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.

OTHELLO  Dost thou hear, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my patience,
But (dost thou hear?) most bloody.

IAGO  That's not amiss.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
[Othello withdraws.]
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A huswife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
That dotes on Cassio--as 'tis the strumpet's plague
To beguile many and be beguiled by one.
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.

[Enter Cassio.]

As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad,
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behaviors
Quite in the wrong.--How do you, lieutenant?

CASSIO
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.

IAGO
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on 't.
Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's power,
How quickly should you speed!

CASSIO, [laughing]  Alas, poor caitiff!

OTHELLO  Look how he laughs already!

IAGO  I never knew woman love man so.

CASSIO
Alas, poor rogue, I think i' faith she loves me.

OTHELLO
Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.

IAGO
Do you hear, Cassio?

OTHELLO  Now he importunes him
To tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.

IAGO
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?

CASSIO  Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO
Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?

CASSIO  I marry her? What, a customer? Prithee bear
some charity to my wit! Do not think it so unwholesome.
Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO  So, so, so, so. They laugh that wins.

IAGO
Faith, the cry goes that you marry her.

CASSIO  Prithee say true!

IAGO  I am a very villain else.

OTHELLO  Have you scored me? Well.

CASSIO  This is the monkey's own giving out. She is
persuaded I will marry her out of her own love and
flattery, not out of my promise.

OTHELLO
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.

CASSIO  She was here even now. She haunts me in
every place. I was the other day talking on the
sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes
the bauble. By this hand, she falls thus about my
neck!

OTHELLO  Crying, "O dear Cassio," as it were; his
gesture imports it.

CASSIO  So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so
shakes and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO  Now he tells how she plucked him to my
chamber.--O, I see that nose of yours, but not that
dog I shall throw it to.

CASSIO  Well, I must leave her company.

IAGO  Before me, look where she comes.

[Enter Bianca.]


CASSIO  'Tis such another fitchew--marry, a perfumed
one!--What do you mean by this haunting
of me?

BIANCA  Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did
you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me
even now? I was a fine fool to take it! I must take
out the work? A likely piece of work, that you
should find it in your chamber and know not who
left it there! This is some minx's token, and I must
take out the work! There, give it your hobbyhorse.
Wheresoever you had it, I'll take out no work on 't.

CASSIO
How now, my sweet Bianca? How now? How now?

OTHELLO
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!

BIANCA  If you'll come to supper tonight you may. If
you will not, come when you are next prepared
for.	[She exits.]

IAGO  After her, after her!

CASSIO  Faith, I must. She'll rail in the streets else.

IAGO  Will you sup there?

CASSIO  Faith, I intend so.

IAGO  Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very
fain speak with you.

CASSIO  Prithee come. Will you?

IAGO  Go to; say no more.	[Cassio exits.]

OTHELLO, [coming forward]  How shall I murder him,
Iago?

IAGO  Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

OTHELLO  O Iago!

IAGO  And did you see the handkerchief?

OTHELLO  Was that mine?

IAGO  Yours, by this hand! And to see how he prizes
the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and
he hath giv'n it his whore.

OTHELLO  I would have him nine years a-killing! A fine
woman, a fair woman, a sweet woman!

IAGO  Nay, you must forget that.

OTHELLO  Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned
tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned
to stone. I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the
world hath not a sweeter creature! She might lie by
an emperor's side and command him tasks.

IAGO  Nay, that's not your way.

OTHELLO  Hang her, I do but say what she is! So
delicate with her needle, an admirable musician--
O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear!
Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!

IAGO  She's the worse for all this.

OTHELLO  O, a thousand, a thousand times!--And then
of so gentle a condition!

IAGO  Ay, too gentle.

OTHELLO  Nay, that's certain. But yet the pity of it,
Iago! O, Iago, the pity of it, Iago!

IAGO  If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her
patent to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes
near nobody.

OTHELLO  I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?

IAGO  O, 'tis foul in her.

OTHELLO  With mine officer!

IAGO  That's fouler.

OTHELLO  Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I'll not
expostulate with her lest her body and beauty
unprovide my mind again. This night, Iago.

IAGO  Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed,
even the bed she hath contaminated.

OTHELLO  Good, good. The justice of it pleases. Very
good.

IAGO  And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You
shall hear more by midnight.

OTHELLO
Excellent good.	[A trumpet sounds.]
What trumpet is that same?

IAGO  I warrant something from Venice.

[Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants.]

'Tis Lodovico. This comes from the Duke.
See, your wife's with him.

LODOVICO  God save you, worthy general.

OTHELLO  With all my heart, sir.

LODOVICO
The Duke and the Senators of Venice greet you.
[He hands Othello a paper.]

OTHELLO
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

DESDEMONA
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?

IAGO
I am very glad to see you, signior.
Welcome to Cyprus.

LODOVICO
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?

IAGO  Lives, sir.

DESDEMONA
Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.

OTHELLO  Are you sure of that?

DESDEMONA  My lord?

OTHELLO, [reading]  "This fail you not to do, as you
will"--

LODOVICO
He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?

DESDEMONA
A most unhappy one. I would do much
T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

OTHELLO  Fire and brimstone!

DESDEMONA  My lord?

OTHELLO  Are you wise?

DESDEMONA
What, is he angry?

LODOVICO  May be the letter moved him.
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.

DESDEMONA  By my troth, I am glad on 't.

OTHELLO  Indeed?

DESDEMONA  My lord?

OTHELLO  I am glad to see you mad.

DESDEMONA  Why, sweet Othello!

OTHELLO, [striking her]  Devil!

DESDEMONA  I have not deserved this.

LODOVICO
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw 't. 'Tis very much.
Make her amends. She weeps.

OTHELLO  O, devil, devil!
If that the Earth could teem with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!

DESDEMONA  I will not stay to offend you.
[She begins to leave.]

LODOVICO  Truly an obedient lady.
I do beseech your Lordship call her back.

OTHELLO  Mistress.

DESDEMONA, [turning back]  My lord?

OTHELLO  What would you with her, sir?

LODOVICO  Who, I, my lord?

OTHELLO
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep.
And she's obedient, as you say, obedient.
Very obedient.--Proceed you in your tears.--
Concerning this, sir--O, well-painted passion!--
I am commanded home.--Get you away.
I'll send for you anon.--Sir, I obey the mandate
And will return to Venice.--Hence, avaunt!
[Desdemona exits.]
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight
I do entreat that we may sup together.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and
monkeys!	[He exits.]

LODOVICO
Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake, whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?

IAGO  He is much
changed.

LODOVICO
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?

IAGO
He's that he is. I may not breathe my censure
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were.

LODOVICO  What? Strike his wife?

IAGO
'Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst.

LODOVICO  Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood
And new-create this fault?

IAGO  Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe
him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech. Do but go after
And mark how he continues.

LODOVICO
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Othello and Emilia.]


OTHELLO  You have seen nothing then?

EMILIA
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

OTHELLO
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

EMILIA
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

OTHELLO
What, did they never whisper?

EMILIA  Never, my lord.

OTHELLO  Nor send you out o' th' way?

EMILIA  Never.

OTHELLO
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?

EMILIA  Never, my lord.

OTHELLO  That's strange.

EMILIA
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
Remove your thought. It doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy. The purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.

OTHELLO  Bid her come hither. Go.
[Emilia exits.]
She says enough. Yet she's a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets.
And yet she'll kneel and pray. I have seen her do 't.

[Enter Desdemona and Emilia.]


DESDEMONA  My lord, what is your will?

OTHELLO
Pray you, chuck, come hither.

DESDEMONA  What is your
pleasure?

OTHELLO
Let me see your eyes. Look in my face.

DESDEMONA  What horrible fancy's this?

OTHELLO, [to Emilia]  Some of your function,
mistress.
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door.
Cough, or cry "hem," if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch.
[Emilia exits.]

DESDEMONA, [kneeling]
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.

OTHELLO  Why? What art thou?

DESDEMONA
Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.

OTHELLO  Come, swear it. Damn thyself,
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double
damned.
Swear thou art honest.

DESDEMONA  Heaven doth truly know it.

OTHELLO
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

DESDEMONA, [standing]
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?

OTHELLO
Ah, Desdemon, away, away, away!

DESDEMONA
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
I have lost him too.

OTHELLO  Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction, had they rained
All kind of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
A fixed figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at--
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.
But there where I have garnered up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life,
The fountain from the which my current runs
Or else dries up--to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in--turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,
Ay, there look grim as hell.

DESDEMONA
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

OTHELLO
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing! O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell'st so sweet
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst
ne'er been born!

DESDEMONA
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

OTHELLO
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write "whore" upon? What committed?
Committed? O thou public commoner,
I should make very forges of my cheeks
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth
And will not hear 't. What committed?
Impudent strumpet!

DESDEMONA  By heaven, you do me wrong!

OTHELLO  Are not you a strumpet?

DESDEMONA  No, as I am a Christian!
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

OTHELLO  What, not a whore?

DESDEMONA  No, as I shall be saved.

OTHELLO  Is 't possible?

DESDEMONA
O, heaven forgive us!

OTHELLO  I cry you mercy, then.
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.--You, mistress,

[Enter Emilia.]

That have the office opposite to Saint Peter
And keeps the gate of hell--you, you, ay, you!
We have done our course. There's money for your
pains.	[He gives her money.]
I pray you turn the key and keep our counsel.
[He exits.]

EMILIA
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?

DESDEMONA  Faith, half asleep.

EMILIA
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?

DESDEMONA  With who?

EMILIA  Why, with my lord, madam.

DESDEMONA
Who is thy lord?

EMILIA  He that is yours, sweet lady.

DESDEMONA
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia.
I cannot weep, nor answers have I none
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember.
And call thy husband hither.

EMILIA  Here's a change indeed.	[She exits.]

DESDEMONA
'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
How have I been behaved that he might stick
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?

[Enter Iago and Emilia.]


IAGO
What is your pleasure, madam? How is 't with you?

DESDEMONA
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.

IAGO  What is the matter, lady?

EMILIA
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her
As true hearts cannot bear.

DESDEMONA
Am I that name, Iago?

IAGO  What name, fair
lady?

DESDEMONA
Such as she said my lord did say I was.

EMILIA
He called her "whore." A beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.

IAGO  Why did he so?

DESDEMONA
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.

IAGO
Do not weep, do not weep! Alas the day!

EMILIA
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father and her country and her friends,
To be called "whore"? Would it not make one
weep?

DESDEMONA  It is my wretched fortune.

IAGO
Beshrew him for 't! How comes this trick upon him?

DESDEMONA  Nay, heaven doth know.

EMILIA
I will be hanged if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else.

IAGO
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.

DESDEMONA
If any such there be, heaven pardon him.

EMILIA
A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her "whore"? Who keeps her
company?
What place? What time? What form? What
likelihood?
The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that such companions thou 'dst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world,
Even from the east to th' west!

IAGO  Speak within door.

EMILIA
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turned your wit the seamy side without
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

IAGO
You are a fool. Go to!

DESDEMONA  Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him. For by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. [She kneels.] Here I
kneel.
If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense
Delighted them in any other form,
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will--though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement--love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! [She stands.] Unkindness may
do much,
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say "whore"--
It does abhor me now I speak the word.
To do the act that might the addition earn,
Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.

IAGO
I pray you be content. 'Tis but his humor.
The business of the state does him offense,
And he does chide with you.

DESDEMONA
If 'twere no other--

IAGO  It is but so, I warrant.
[Trumpets sound.]
Hark how these instruments summon to supper.
The messengers of Venice stays the meat.
Go in and weep not. All things shall be well.
[Desdemona and Emilia exit.]

[Enter Roderigo.]

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO  I do not find
That thou deal'st justly with me.

IAGO  What in the contrary?

RODERIGO  Every day thou daff'st me with some device,
Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now,
keep'st from me all conveniency than suppliest me
with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no
longer endure it. Nor am I yet persuaded to put up
in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.

IAGO  Will you hear me, Roderigo?

RODERIGO  Faith, I have heard too much, and your
words and performances are no kin together.

IAGO  You charge me most unjustly.

RODERIGO  With naught but truth. I have wasted myself
out of my means. The jewels you have had
from me to deliver to Desdemona would half have
corrupted a votaress. You have told me she hath
received them, and returned me expectations and
comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I
find none.

IAGO  Well, go to! Very well.

RODERIGO  "Very well." "Go to!" I cannot go to, man,
nor 'tis not very well! By this hand, I say 'tis very
scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.

IAGO  Very well.

RODERIGO  I tell you 'tis not very well! I will make
myself known to Desdemona. If she will return me
my jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will
seek satisfaction of you.

IAGO  You have said now.

RODERIGO  Ay, and said nothing but what I protest
intendment of doing.

IAGO  Why, now I see there's mettle in thee, and even
from this instant do build on thee a better opinion
than ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo.
Thou hast taken against me a most just exception,
but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy
affair.

RODERIGO  It hath not appeared.

IAGO  I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your
suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But,
Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed which I
have greater reason to believe now than ever--I
mean purpose, courage, and valor--this night show
it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona,
take me from this world with treachery and
devise engines for my life.

RODERIGO  Well, what is it? Is it within reason and
compass?

IAGO  Sir, there is especial commission come from
Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place.

RODERIGO  Is that true? Why, then, Othello and Desdemona
return again to Venice.

IAGO  O, no. He goes into Mauritania and takes away
with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be
lingered here by some accident--wherein none
can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.

RODERIGO  How do you mean, removing him?

IAGO  Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's
place: knocking out his brains.

RODERIGO  And that you would have me to do?

IAGO  Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He
sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to
him. He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If
you will watch his going thence (which I will
fashion to fall out between twelve and one), you may
take him at your pleasure. I will be near to second
your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come,
stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will
show you such a necessity in his death that you shall
think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high
supper time, and the night grows to waste. About it!

RODERIGO  I will hear further reason for this.

IAGO  And you shall be satisfied.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and
Attendants.]


LODOVICO
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

OTHELLO
O, pardon me, 'twill do me good to walk.

LODOVICO
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your Ladyship.

DESDEMONA  Your Honor is most welcome.

OTHELLO
Will you walk, sir?--O, Desdemona--

DESDEMONA  My lord?

OTHELLO  Get you to bed on th' instant. I will be
returned forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there.
Look 't be done.

DESDEMONA  I will, my lord.
[All but Desdemona and Emilia exit.]

EMILIA
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.

DESDEMONA
He says he will return incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.

EMILIA  Dismiss me?

DESDEMONA
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.

EMILIA  I would you had never seen him.

DESDEMONA
So would not I. My love doth so approve him
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns--
Prithee, unpin me--have grace and favor in them.

EMILIA
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.

DESDEMONA
All's one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.

EMILIA  Come, come, you talk!

DESDEMONA
My mother had a maid called Barbary.
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
And did forsake her. She had a song of willow,
An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.

EMILIA  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?

DESDEMONA  No, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a proper man.

EMILIA  A very handsome man.

DESDEMONA  He speaks well.

EMILIA  I know a lady in Venice would have walked
barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.

DESDEMONA, [singing]
	The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
	   Sing all a green willow.
	Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
	The fresh streams ran by her and murmured her
moans,
	   Sing willow, willow, willow;
	Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the
stones--
Lay by these.
	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
Prithee hie thee! He'll come anon.
	Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
	Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve.
Nay, that's not next. Hark, who is 't that knocks?

EMILIA  It's the wind.

DESDEMONA
	I called my love false love, but what said he then?
	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
	If I court more women, you'll couch with more
men.--
So, get thee gone. Good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?

EMILIA  'Tis neither here nor there.

DESDEMONA
I have heard it said so. O these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think--tell me, Emilia--
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?

EMILIA  There be some such, no
question.

DESDEMONA
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA
Why, would not you?

DESDEMONA  No, by this heavenly light!

EMILIA
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.
I might do 't as well i' th' dark.

DESDEMONA
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA  The world's a huge thing. It is a great price
for a small vice.

DESDEMONA  In troth, I think thou wouldst not.

EMILIA  In troth, I think I should, and undo 't when I
had done it. Marry, I would not do such a thing for
a joint ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition.
But for the whole world--'Uds pity! Who
would not make her husband a cuckold to make
him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for 't.

DESDEMONA  Beshrew me if I would do such a wrong
for the whole world!

EMILIA  Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world;
and, having the world for your labor, 'tis a wrong in
your own world, and you might quickly make it
right.

DESDEMONA  I do not think there is any such woman.

EMILIA  Yes, a dozen; and as many to th' vantage as
would store the world they played for.
But I do think it is their husbands' faults
If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite.
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them. They see, and
smell,
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is 't frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well. Else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.

DESDEMONA
Good night, good night. God me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Iago and Roderigo.]


IAGO
Here, stand behind this bulk. Straight will he
come.
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick! Fear nothing. I'll be at thy elbow.
It makes us or it mars us--think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.

RODERIGO
Be near at hand. I may miscarry in 't.

IAGO
Here, at thy hand. Be bold and take thy stand.
[He moves aside.]

RODERIGO
I have no great devotion to the deed,
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword! He dies.
[He draws his sword.]

IAGO, [aside]
I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him
As gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him. There stand I in much peril.
No, he must die. Be 't so. I hear him coming.

[Enter Cassio.]


RODERIGO
I know his gait. 'Tis he!--Villain, thou diest!
[He thrusts at Cassio.]

CASSIO
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed
But that my coat is better than thou know'st.
I will make proof of thine.
[He draws, and stabs Roderigo.]

RODERIGO  O, I am slain!
[Roderigo falls.]
[Iago stabs Cassio in the leg, and exits.]

CASSIO
I am maimed forever! Help, ho! Murder, murder!

[Enter Othello.]


OTHELLO
The voice of Cassio! Iago keeps his word.

RODERIGO  O, villain that I am!

OTHELLO, [aside]  It is even so.

CASSIO  O, help ho! Light! A surgeon!

OTHELLO, [aside]
'Tis he! O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
Thou teachest me.--Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come.
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are
blotted.
Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust's blood be
spotted.	[Othello exits.]

[Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.]


CASSIO
What ho! No watch? No passage? Murder, murder!

GRATIANO
'Tis some mischance. The voice is very direful.

CASSIO  O, help!

LODOVICO  Hark!

RODERIGO  O wretched villain!

LODOVICO
Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night.
These may be counterfeits. Let's think 't unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.

RODERIGO
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.

[Enter Iago with a light.]


LODOVICO  Hark!

GRATIANO
Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and
weapons.

IAGO
Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on
murder?

LODOVICO
We do not know.

IAGO  Did not you hear a cry?

CASSIO
Here, here! For heaven's sake, help me!

IAGO  What's the matter?

GRATIANO, [to Lodovico]
This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.

LODOVICO
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.

IAGO, [to Cassio]
What are you here that cry so grievously?

CASSIO
Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains.
Give me some help!

IAGO
O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?

CASSIO
I think that one of them is hereabout
And cannot make away.

IAGO  O treacherous villains!
[To Lodovico and Gratiano.] What are you there?
Come in, and give some help.

RODERIGO  O, help me here!

CASSIO
That's one of them.

IAGO, [to Roderigo]  O murd'rous slave! O villain!
[He stabs Roderigo.]

RODERIGO
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!

IAGO
Kill men i' th' dark?--Where be these bloody
thieves?
How silent is this town! Ho, murder, murder!--
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?

LODOVICO
As you shall prove us, praise us.

IAGO  Signior Lodovico?

LODOVICO  He, sir.

IAGO
I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.

GRATIANO  Cassio?

IAGO
How is 't, brother?

CASSIO  My leg is cut in two.

IAGO  Marry, heaven forbid!
Light, gentlemen. I'll bind it with my shirt.

[Enter Bianca.]


BIANCA
What is the matter, ho? Who is 't that cried?

IAGO
Who is 't that cried?

BIANCA  O, my dear Cassio,
My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?

CASSIO  No.

GRATIANO
I am sorry to find you thus; I have been to seek you.

IAGO
Lend me a garter. So.--O for a chair
To bear him easily hence!

BIANCA
Alas, he faints. O, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.--
Patience awhile, good Cassio.--Come, come;
Lend me a light. [Peering at Roderigo.] Know we this
face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? No! Yes, sure. O heaven, Roderigo!

GRATIANO  What, of Venice?

IAGO  Even he, sir. Did you know him?

GRATIANO  Know him? Ay.

IAGO
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners
That so neglected you.

GRATIANO  I am glad to see you.

IAGO
How do you, Cassio?--O, a chair, a chair!

GRATIANO  Roderigo?

IAGO
He, he, 'tis he! [A chair is brought in.] O, that's well
said; the chair.--
Some good man bear him carefully from hence.
I'll fetch the General's surgeon.-- For you, mistress,
Save you your labor.--He that lies slain here,
Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?

CASSIO
None in the world. Nor do I know the man.

IAGO, [to Bianca]
What, look you pale?--O, bear him out o' th' air.
[Cassio, in the chair, and Roderigo are carried off.]
[To Gratiano and Lodovico.] Stay you, good
gentlemen.--Look you pale, mistress?--
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?--
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.--
Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.

[Enter Emilia.]


EMILIA
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter,
husband?

IAGO
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.
He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

EMILIA
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!

IAGO
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.
[To Bianca.] What, do you shake at that?

BIANCA
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.

IAGO
O, did he so? I charge you go with me.

EMILIA  O fie upon thee, strumpet!

BIANCA
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.

EMILIA  As I? Faugh! Fie upon thee!

IAGO
Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dressed.--
Come, mistress, you must tell 's another tale.--
Emilia, run you to the citadel
And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.--
Will you go on afore? [Aside.] This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
[They exit in different directions.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Othello with a light, and Desdemona in her bed.]


OTHELLO
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul.
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars.
It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light.
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore
Should I repent me. But once put out thy light,
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have plucked the
rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again.
It needs must wither. I'll smell it on the tree.
O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! [He kisses her.] One
more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee
And love thee after. One more, and this the last.
[He kisses her.]
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow's heavenly:
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.

DESDEMONA
Who's there? Othello?

OTHELLO  Ay, Desdemona.

DESDEMONA  Will you come to bed, my lord?

OTHELLO
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?

DESDEMONA  Ay, my lord.

OTHELLO
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.

DESDEMONA  Alack, my lord,
What may you mean by that?

OTHELLO
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by.
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit.
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

DESDEMONA  Talk you of killing?

OTHELLO
Ay, I do.

DESDEMONA  Then heaven have mercy on me.

OTHELLO  Amen, with all my heart.

DESDEMONA
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

OTHELLO  Humh.

DESDEMONA
And yet I fear you, for you're fatal then
When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know
not,
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.

OTHELLO
Think on thy sins.

DESDEMONA  They are loves I bear to you.

OTHELLO  Ay, and for that thou diest.

DESDEMONA
That death's unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope
They do not point on me.

OTHELLO  Peace, and be still.

DESDEMONA
I will so. What's the matter?

OTHELLO  That handkerchief
Which I so loved, and gave thee, thou gav'st to
Cassio.

DESDEMONA
No, by my life and soul! Send for the man
And ask him.

OTHELLO
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury.
Thou art on thy deathbed.

DESDEMONA
Ay, but not yet to die.

OTHELLO  Yes, presently.
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin.
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

DESDEMONA
Then Lord have mercy on me!

OTHELLO  I say "Amen."

DESDEMONA
And have you mercy, too. I never did
Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.

OTHELLO
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in 's hand!
O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart
And mak'st me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice!
I saw the handkerchief!

DESDEMONA  He found it, then.
I never gave it him. Send for him hither.
Let him confess a truth.

OTHELLO  He hath confessed.

DESDEMONA  What, my lord?

OTHELLO
That he hath used thee.

DESDEMONA  How? Unlawfully?

OTHELLO  Ay.

DESDEMONA
He will not say so.

OTHELLO  No. His mouth is stopped.
Honest Iago hath ta'en order for 't.

DESDEMONA
O, my fear interprets. What, is he dead?

OTHELLO
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.

DESDEMONA
Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.	[She weeps.]

OTHELLO
Out, strumpet! Weep'st thou for him to my face?

DESDEMONA
O banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

OTHELLO  Down, strumpet!

DESDEMONA
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight.

OTHELLO  Nay, if you strive--

DESDEMONA
But half an hour!

OTHELLO  Being done, there is no pause.

DESDEMONA
But while I say one prayer!

OTHELLO  It is too late.
[He smothers her.]

EMILIA, [within]
My lord, my lord? What ho! My lord, my lord!

OTHELLO
What noise is this?--Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful.
I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
So, so.

EMILIA, [within]  What, ho! My lord, my lord!

OTHELLO  Who's
there?

EMILIA, [within]
O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you.

OTHELLO
Yes. 'Tis Emilia.--By and by.--She's dead.
'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death.
The noise was here. Ha, no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were 't good?
I think she stirs again. No. What's best to do?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife.
My wife, my wife! What wife? I have no wife.
O insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.

EMILIA, [within]  I do beseech you
That I may speak with you. O, good my lord--

OTHELLO
I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia.--
Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw.--
Where art thou?

[Enter Emilia.]

What's the matter with thee now?

EMILIA
O, my good lord, yonder's foul murders done.

OTHELLO  What? Now?

EMILIA  But now, my lord.

OTHELLO
It is the very error of the moon.
She comes more nearer Earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.

EMILIA  Cassio, my lord, hath killed
A young Venetian called Roderigo.

OTHELLO
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed?

EMILIA  No, Cassio is not killed.

OTHELLO
Not Cassio killed? Then murder's out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

DESDEMONA  O falsely, falsely murdered.

EMILIA
O Lord, what cry is that?

OTHELLO  That? What?

EMILIA
Out, and alas, that was my lady's voice!
Help! Help ho! Help! O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona, O sweet mistress, speak!

DESDEMONA  A guiltless death I die.

EMILIA  O, who hath done this deed?

DESDEMONA  Nobody. I myself. Farewell.
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell.
[She dies.]

OTHELLO
Why, how should she be murdered?

EMILIA  Alas, who
knows?

OTHELLO
You heard her say herself, it was not I.

EMILIA
She said so. I must needs report the truth.

OTHELLO
She's like a liar gone to burning hell!
'Twas I that killed her.

EMILIA
O, the more angel she, and you the blacker devil!

OTHELLO
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.

EMILIA
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil!

OTHELLO  She was false as water.

EMILIA  Thou art rash as fire to say
That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!

OTHELLO
Cassio did top her. Ask thy husband else.
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.

EMILIA  My husband?

OTHELLO  Thy husband.

EMILIA  That she was false to wedlock?

OTHELLO
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I'd not have sold her for it.

EMILIA  My husband?

OTHELLO
Ay, 'twas he that told me on her first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.

EMILIA  My husband?

OTHELLO
What needs this iterance, woman? I say, thy
husband.

EMILIA
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!--
My husband say she was false?

OTHELLO  He, woman.
I say thy husband. Dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband; honest, honest Iago.

EMILIA
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart!
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
[He draws his sword.]

OTHELLO  Hah?

EMILIA  Do thy worst!
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.

OTHELLO  Peace, you were best!

EMILIA
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt,
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed--
I care not for thy sword. I'll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! Help, ho! Help!
The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!

[Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago.]


MONTANO
What is the matter? How now, general?

EMILIA
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.

GRATIANO  What is the matter?

EMILIA, [to Iago]
Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man.
He says thou told'st him that his wife was false.
I know thou didst not. Thou 'rt not such a villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.

IAGO
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.

EMILIA
But did you ever tell him she was false?

IAGO  I did.

EMILIA
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie!
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?

IAGO
With Cassio, mistress. Go to! Charm your tongue.

EMILIA
I will not charm my tongue. I am bound to speak.
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed.

ALL  O heavens forfend!

EMILIA, [to Iago]
And your reports have set the murder on!

OTHELLO
Nay, stare not, masters; it is true indeed.

GRATIANO  'Tis a strange truth.

MONTANO
O monstrous act!

EMILIA  Villainy, villainy, villainy!
I think upon 't, I think! I smell 't! O villainy!
I thought so then. I'll kill myself for grief!
O villainy! Villainy!

IAGO
What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.

EMILIA
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.

OTHELLO
O, O, O!	[Othello falls on the bed.]

EMILIA  Nay, lay thee down, and roar!
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent
That e'er did lift up eye.

OTHELLO, [standing]  O, she was foul!--
I scarce did know you, uncle. There lies your niece,
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly
stopped.
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

GRATIANO
Poor Desdemon, I am glad thy father's dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.

OTHELLO
'Tis pitiful. But yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.

EMILIA  O God! O heavenly God!

IAGO
Zounds, hold your peace!

EMILIA  'Twill out, 'twill out. I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the north.
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.

IAGO  Be wise, and get you home.
[He draws his sword.]

EMILIA
I will not.

GRATIANO  Fie, your sword upon a woman!

EMILIA
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak'st
of
I found by fortune, and did give my husband--
For often, with a solemn earnestness
(More than indeed belonged to such a trifle),
He begged of me to steal 't.

IAGO  Villainous whore!

EMILIA
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
And I did give 't my husband.

IAGO  Filth, thou liest!

EMILIA
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen!
[To Othello.] O murd'rous coxcomb, what should
such a fool
Do with so good a wife?

OTHELLO  Are there no stones in heaven
But what serves for the thunder?--Precious villain!
[The Moor runs at Iago but is disarmed.]
[Iago kills his wife.]

GRATIANO
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.

EMILIA
Ay, ay! O, lay me by my mistress' side.	[Iago exits.]

GRATIANO  He's gone, but his wife's killed.

MONTANO
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon
Which I have here recovered from the Moor.
Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
For 'tis a damned slave.
[Montano and Gratiano exit.]

OTHELLO  I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honor outlive honesty?
Let it go all.

EMILIA  What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan
And die in music.
[She sings.]	Willow, willow, willow.
Moor, she was chaste. She loved thee, cruel Moor.
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.
So speaking as I think, alas, I die. 	[She dies.]

OTHELLO
I have another weapon in this chamber.
It is a sword of Spain, the ice brook's temper.
O, here it is.--Uncle, I must come forth.

GRATIANO, [within]
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon and perforce must suffer.

OTHELLO
Look in upon me, then, and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO
What is the matter?

OTHELLO  Behold, I have a weapon.
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier's thigh. I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop. But--O vain boast!--
Who can control his fate? 'Tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed.
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismayed? 'Tis a lost fear.
Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
[He looks toward the bed.]
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench,
Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
Even like thy chastity.--O cursed, cursed slave!--
Whip me, you devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur,
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemon! Dead, Desdemon! Dead! O, O!

 [Enter Lodovico, Cassio in a chair, Montano, and Iago,
with Officers.]


LODOVICO
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?

OTHELLO
That's he that was Othello. Here I am.

LODOVICO
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
[Iago is brought forward.]

OTHELLO
I look down towards his feet; but that's a fable.--
If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.
[He stabs Iago.]

LODOVICO
Wrench his sword from him.
[Othello is disarmed.]

IAGO  I bleed, sir, but not killed.

OTHELLO
I am not sorry neither. I'd have thee live,
For in my sense 'tis happiness to die.

LODOVICO
O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?

OTHELLO  Why, anything.
An honorable murderer, if you will,
For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.

LODOVICO
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?

OTHELLO  Ay.

CASSIO
Dear general, I never gave you cause.

OTHELLO
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?

IAGO
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know.
From this time forth I never will speak word.

LODOVICO  What? Not to pray?

GRATIANO  Torments will ope your lips.

OTHELLO  Well, thou dost best.

LODOVICO  Sir,
You shall understand what hath befall'n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another. [He shows papers.] The one of
them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Roderigo.

OTHELLO
O villain!

CASSIO  Most heathenish and most gross.

LODOVICO
Now here's another discontented paper
Found in his pocket, too; and this it seems
Roderigo meant t' have sent this damned villain,
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.

OTHELLO  O, thou pernicious caitiff!--
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife's?

CASSIO  I found it in my chamber.
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.

OTHELLO  O fool, fool, fool!

CASSIO
There is besides, in Roderigo's letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead: Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.

LODOVICO, [to Othello]
You must forsake this room and go with us.
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state.--Come, bring away.

OTHELLO
Soft you. A word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they
know 't.
No more of that. I pray you in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued
eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinable gum. Set you down this.
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turbanned Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
I took by th' throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him, thus.	[He stabs himself.]

LODOVICO  O bloody period!

GRATIANO  All that is spoke is marred.

OTHELLO, [to Desdemona]
I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.	[He dies.]

CASSIO
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.

LODOVICO, [to Iago]  O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.
This is thy work.--The object poisons sight.
Let it be hid.--Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. [To Cassio.] To you, lord
governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain.
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it.
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
[They exit.]

Romeo and Juliet
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/romeo-and-juliet/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ROMEO
MONTAGUE, his father
LADY MONTAGUE, his mother
BENVOLIO, their kinsman
ABRAM, a Montague servingman
BALTHASAR, Romeo's servingman
JULIET
CAPULET, her father
LADY CAPULET, her mother
NURSE to Juliet
TYBALT, kinsman to the Capulets
PETRUCHIO, Tybalt's companion
Capulet's Cousin
Servingmen:
  SAMPSON
  GREGORY
  PETER
Other Servingmen
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona
PARIS, the Prince's kinsman and Juliet's suitor
MERCUTIO, the Prince's kinsman and Romeo's friend
Paris' Page
FRIAR LAWRENCE
FRIAR JOHN
APOTHECARY
Three or four Citizens
Three Musicians
Three Watchmen
CHORUS
Attendants, Maskers, Torchbearers, a Boy with a drum, Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, Tybalt's Page, Servingmen.


THE PROLOGUE
============
[Enter Chorus.]


Two households, both alike in dignity
(In fair Verona, where we lay our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
[Chorus exits.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers,
of the house of Capulet.]


SAMPSON  Gregory, on my word we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY  No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON  I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY  Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of
collar.

SAMPSON  I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY  But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON  A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY  To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to
stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn'st
away.

SAMPSON  A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY  That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest
goes to the wall.

SAMPSON  'Tis true, and therefore women, being the
weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore
I will push Montague's men from the wall and
thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY  The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.

SAMPSON  'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
with the maids; I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY  The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON  Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY  They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON  Me they shall feel while I am able to stand,
and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY  'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor-john. Draw thy tool. Here comes
of the house of Montagues.

[Enter Abram with another Servingman.]


SAMPSON  My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back
thee.

GREGORY  How? Turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON  Fear me not.

GREGORY  No, marry. I fear thee!

SAMPSON  Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.

GREGORY  I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it
as they list.

SAMPSON  Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at
them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.
[He bites his thumb.]

ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON  I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON, [aside to Gregory]  Is the law of our side if I
say "Ay"?

GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  No.

SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir,
but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY  Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAM  Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON  But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as
good a man as you.

ABRAM  No better.

SAMPSON  Well, sir.

[Enter Benvolio.]


GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  Say "better"; here comes
one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON  Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM  You lie.

SAMPSON  Draw if you be men.--Gregory, remember
thy washing blow.	[They fight.]

BENVOLIO  Part, fools!	[Drawing his sword.]
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

[Enter Tybalt, drawing his sword.]


TYBALT
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!	[They fight.]

[Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.]


CITIZENS
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

[Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.]


CAPULET
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a
sword?

[Enter old Montague and his Wife.]

CAPULET
My sword, I say. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE
Thou villain Capulet!--Hold me not; let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

[Enter Prince Escalus with his train.]


PRINCE
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stained steel--
Will they not hear?--What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
[All but Montague, Lady Montague,
and Benvolio exit.]

MONTAGUE, [to Benvolio]
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE
O, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO
Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was 'ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own
(Which then most sought where most might not be
found,
Being one too many by my weary self),
Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO
Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE
Both by myself and many other friends.
But he, his own affections' counselor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true,
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO
See where he comes. So please you, step aside.
I'll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift.--Come, madam, let's away.
[Montague and Lady Montague exit.]

BENVOLIO
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO  Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO
But new struck nine.

ROMEO  Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO  In love?

ROMEO  Out--

BENVOLIO  Of love?

ROMEO
Out of her favor where I am in love.

BENVOLIO
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?--O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O anything of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO  No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO  At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO  Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO  Soft, I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.
This is not Romeo. He's some other where.

BENVOLIO
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?

ROMEO  What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO
Groan? Why, no. But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO
A sick man in sadness makes his will--
A word ill urged to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO
A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO
Well in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
And, in strong proof of chastity well armed,
From love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty, starved with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.

ROMEO
O, teach me how I should forget to think!

BENVOLIO
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO  'Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair;
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO
I'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Capulet, County Paris, and a Servingman.]


CAPULET
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS
Of honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET
But saying o'er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET
And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
She's the hopeful lady of my earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
My will to her consent is but a part.
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest
Such as I love; and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-appareled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Come go with me.	[To Servingman, giving him a list.]
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
[Capulet and Paris exit.]

SERVINGMAN  Find them out whose names are written
here! It is written that the shoemaker should
meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets.
But I am sent to find those persons whose names
are here writ, and can never find what names the
writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned.
In good time!

[Enter Benvolio and Romeo.]


BENVOLIO, [to Romeo]
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
One pain is lessened by another's anguish.
Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO  For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO  Why Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented, and--good e'en, good
fellow.

SERVINGMAN  God gi' good e'en. I pray, sir, can you
read?

ROMEO
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

SERVINGMAN  Perhaps you have learned it without
book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

SERVINGMAN  You say honestly. Rest you merry.

ROMEO  Stay, fellow. I can read.	[(He reads the letter.)]
Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters,
The lady widow of Vitruvio,
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine,
Mine Uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt,
Lucio and the lively Helena.
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?

SERVINGMAN  Up.

ROMEO  Whither? To supper?

SERVINGMAN  To our house.

ROMEO  Whose house?

SERVINGMAN  My master's.

ROMEO
Indeed I should have asked thee that before.

SERVINGMAN  Now I'll tell you without asking. My
master is the great rich Capulet, and, if you be not
of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.	[He exits.]

BENVOLIO
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye;
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

ROMEO
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
I bade her come.--What, lamb! What, ladybird!
God forbid. Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET  How now, who calls?

NURSE  Your mother.

JULIET
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET
This is the matter.--Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.--Nurse, come back again.
I have remembered me, thou 's hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

NURSE
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET  She's not fourteen.

NURSE  I'll lay fourteen of my teeth (and yet, to my teen
be it spoken, I have but four) she's not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammastide?

LADY CAPULET  A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marry, I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
And she was weaned (I never shall forget it)
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug.
"Shake," quoth the dovehouse. 'Twas no need, I
trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years.
For then she could stand high-lone. Nay, by th'
rood,
She could have run and waddled all about,
For even the day before, she broke her brow,
And then my husband (God be with his soul,
He was a merry man) took up the child.
"Yea," quoth he, "Dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" And, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said "Ay."
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. "Wilt thou not, Jule?"
quoth he.
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said "Ay."

LADY CAPULET
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.

NURSE
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say "Ay."
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone,
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
"Yea," quoth my husband. "Fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said "Ay."

JULIET
And stint thou, too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

NURSE
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET
Marry, that "marry" is the very theme
I came to talk of.--Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET
It is an honor that I dream not of.

NURSE
An honor? Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy
teat.

LADY CAPULET
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE
A man, young lady--lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE
Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen.
Examine every married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET
I'll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

[Enter Servingman.]


SERVINGMAN  Madam, the guests are come, supper
served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the
Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you,
follow straight.

LADY CAPULET
We follow thee.	[Servingman exits.]
Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other
Maskers, Torchbearers, and a Boy with a drum.]


ROMEO
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO
The date is out of such prolixity.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will.
We'll measure them a measure and be gone.

ROMEO
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO
And to sink in it should you burden love--
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.--
Give me a case to put my visage in.--
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
I'll be a candle holder and look on;
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire--
Or, save your reverence, love--wherein thou
stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO
Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO  I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO  Why, may one ask?

ROMEO
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO  And so did I.

ROMEO
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO  That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men's noses as they lie asleep.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine's wat'ry beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
On courtiers' knees, that dream on cur'sies straight;
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she--

ROMEO  Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO  True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO
I fear too early, for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO  Strike, drum.
[They march about the stage
and then withdraw to the side.]

Scene 5
=======
[Servingmen come forth with napkins.]


FIRST SERVINGMAN  Where's Potpan that he helps not
to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a
trencher?

SECOND SERVINGMAN  When good manners shall lie
all in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed
too, 'tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Away with the joint stools, remove
the court cupboard, look to the plate.--
Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone
and Nell.--Anthony and Potpan!

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Ay, boy, ready.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  You are looked for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  We cannot be here and there too.
Cheerly, boys! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver
take all.	[They move aside.]

[Enter Capulet and his household, all the guests and
gentlewomen to Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, and the
other Maskers.]


CAPULET
Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with
you.--
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns. Am I come near you
now?--
Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone.
You are welcome, gentlemen.--Come, musicians,
play.	[Music plays and they dance.]
A hall, a hall, give room!--And foot it, girls.--
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.--
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.--
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is 't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET'S COUSIN  By 'r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET
What, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.

CAPULET'S COUSIN
'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirty.

CAPULET  Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO, [to a Servingman]
What lady's that which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVINGMAN  I know not, sir.

ROMEO
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear--
Beauty too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.--
Fetch me my rapier, boy.	[Page exits.]
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT  'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET  He shall be endured.
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or you? Go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, you'll be the man!

TYBALT
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET  Go to, go to.
You are a saucy boy. Is 't so indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You must contrary me. Marry, 'tis time--
Well said, my hearts.--You are a princox, go.
Be quiet, or--More light, more light!--for shame,
I'll make you quiet.--What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
[He exits.]

ROMEO, [taking Juliet's hand]
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO
Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
[He kisses her.]
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.

JULIET
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.	[He kisses her.]

JULIET  You kiss by th' book.

NURSE
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
[Juliet moves toward her mother.]

ROMEO
What is her mother?

NURSE  Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.	[Nurse moves away.]

ROMEO, [aside]  Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO
Away, begone. The sport is at the best.

ROMEO
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.

CAPULET
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.--
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.--
More torches here.--Come on then, let's to bed.--
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.
I'll to my rest.
[All but Juliet and the Nurse begin to exit.]

JULIET
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

NURSE
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET
What's he that now is going out of door?

NURSE
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.

JULIET
What's he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE  I know not.

JULIET
Go ask his name. [The Nurse goes.] If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE, [returning]
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE
What's this? What's this?

JULIET  A rhyme I learned even now
Of one I danced withal.
[One calls within "Juliet."]

NURSE  Anon, anon.
Come, let's away. The strangers all are gone.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====



[Enter Chorus.]


Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
[Chorus exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo alone.]


ROMEO
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
[He withdraws.]

[Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!

MERCUTIO  He is wise
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO  Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.
Cry but "Ay me," pronounce but "love" and
"dove."
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.--
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.--
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.--
O Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open-arse, thou a pop'rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.--
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO  Go, then, for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Romeo comes forward.]



ROMEO
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

[Enter Juliet above.]

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady. O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those
stars
As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET  Ay me.

ROMEO, [aside]  She speaks.
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO, [aside]
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And, for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

ROMEO  I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO  By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO
With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO
I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say "Ay,"
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more coying to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st ere I was ware
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET
O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO
What shall I swear by?

JULIET  Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO  If my heart's dear love--

JULIET
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say "It lightens." Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO
Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
[Nurse calls from within.]
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.--
Anon, good nurse.--Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little; I will come again.	[She exits.]

ROMEO
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

[Reenter Juliet above.]


JULIET
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET
I come anon.--But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee--

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET  By and by, I come.--
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO  So thrive my soul--

JULIET  A thousand times good night.	[She exits.]

ROMEO
A thousand times the worse to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their
books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
[Going.]

[Enter Juliet above again.]


JULIET
Hist, Romeo, hist! O, for a falc'ner's voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of "My Romeo!"

ROMEO
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET
Romeo.

ROMEO  My dear.

JULIET  What o'clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO  By the hour of nine.

JULIET
I will not fail. 'Tis twenty year till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.

ROMEO
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET
'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET  Sweet, so would I.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet
sorrow
That I shall say "Good night" till it be morrow.
[She exits.]

ROMEO
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly friar's close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence alone with a basket.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The Earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.

[Enter Romeo.]

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each
part;
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs--grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Benedicite.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid "Good morrow" to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth
reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp'rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
That's my good son. But where hast thou been
then?

ROMEO
I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow
I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence
then:
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO
And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO
I pray thee, chide me not. Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I'll thy assistant be,
For this alliance may so happy prove
To turn your households' rancor to pure love.

ROMEO
O, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]


MERCUTIO
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO
Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO  A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO  Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO  Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO  Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how
he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO  Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead,
stabbed with a white wench's black eye, run
through the ear with a love-song, the very pin of his
heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt shaft. And
is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO  Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO  More than prince of cats. O, he's the courageous
captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.
He rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in
your bosom--the very butcher of a silk button, a
duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house
of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal
passado, the punto reverso, the hay!

BENVOLIO  The what?

MERCUTIO  The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
phantasimes, these new tuners of accent: "By
Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good
whore!" Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire,
that we should be thus afflicted with these
strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these "pardon-me" 's,
who stand so much on the new form
that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O their
bones, their bones!

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO  Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Without his roe, like a dried herring. O
flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the
numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady
was a kitchen wench (marry, she had a better love
to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a gray
eye or so, but not to the purpose.--Signior Romeo,
bonjour. There's a French salutation to your French
slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO  Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit
did I give you?

MERCUTIO  The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?

ROMEO  Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was
great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain
courtesy.

MERCUTIO  That's as much as to say such a case as
yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO  Meaning, to curtsy.

MERCUTIO  Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO  A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO  Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO  "Pink" for flower.

MERCUTIO  Right.

ROMEO  Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO  Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou
hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole
of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing,
solely singular.

ROMEO  O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO  Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits
faints.

ROMEO  Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll cry
a match.

MERCUTIO  Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I
am done, for thou hast more of the wild goose in
one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole
five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO  Thou wast never with me for anything when
thou wast not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO  I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO  Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO  Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO  And is it not, then, well served into a sweet
goose?

MERCUTIO  O, here's a wit of cheveril that stretches
from an inch narrow to an ell broad.

ROMEO  I stretch it out for that word "broad," which
added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a
broad goose.

MERCUTIO  Why, is not this better now than groaning
for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou
Romeo, now art thou what thou art, by art as well as
by nature. For this driveling love is like a great
natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his
bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO  Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO  Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against
the hair.

BENVOLIO  Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO  O, thou art deceived. I would have made it
short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale
and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.

[Enter Nurse and her man Peter.]


ROMEO  Here's goodly gear. A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO  Two, two--a shirt and a smock.

NURSE  Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO  Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's
the fairer face.

NURSE  God you good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO  God you good e'en, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE  Is it good e'en?

MERCUTIO  'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of
the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

NURSE  Out upon you! What a man are you?

ROMEO  One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself
to mar.

NURSE  By my troth, it is well said: "for himself to
mar," quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me
where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO  I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older
when you have found him than he was when you
sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.

NURSE  You say well.

MERCUTIO  Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i'
faith, wisely, wisely.

NURSE  If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.

BENVOLIO  She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO  A bawd, a bawd, a bawd. So ho!

ROMEO  What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO  No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten
pie that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[Singing.]	An old hare hoar,
	And an old hare hoar,
	   Is very good meat in Lent.
	But a hare that is hoar
	Is too much for a score
	   When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to
dinner thither.

ROMEO  I will follow you.

MERCUTIO  Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady,
lady.	[Mercutio and Benvolio exit.]

NURSE  I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this
that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO  A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself
talk and will speak more in a minute than he will
stand to in a month.

NURSE  An he speak anything against me, I'll take him
down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty
such jacks. An if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave, I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none
of his skains-mates. [To Peter.] And thou must stand
by too and suffer every knave to use me at his
pleasure.

PETER  I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had,
my weapon should quickly have been out. I warrant
you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I
see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my
side.

NURSE  Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part
about me quivers. Scurvy knave! [To Romeo.] Pray
you, sir, a word. And, as I told you, my young lady
bid me inquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
keep to myself. But first let me tell you, if you
should lead her in a fool's paradise, as they say, it
were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. For
the gentlewoman is young; and therefore, if you
should deal double with her, truly it were an ill
thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very
weak dealing.

ROMEO  Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.
I protest unto thee--

NURSE  Good heart, and i' faith I will tell her as much.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO  What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not
mark me.

NURSE  I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO  Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
[Offering her money.]

NURSE  No, truly, sir, not a penny.

ROMEO  Go to, I say you shall.

NURSE
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE
Now, God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO  What sayst thou, my dear nurse?

NURSE
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say
"Two may keep counsel, putting one away"?

ROMEO
Warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE  Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord,
Lord, when 'twas a little prating thing--O, there is
a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay
knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes
and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but I'll
warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO  Ay, nurse, what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE  Ah, mocker, that's the dog's name. R is for
the--No, I know it begins with some other letter,
and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you
and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO  Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE  Ay, a thousand times.--Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  Before and apace.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.

[Enter Nurse and Peter.]

O God, she comes!--O, honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

NURSE  Peter, stay at the gate.	[Peter exits.]

JULIET
Now, good sweet nurse--O Lord, why lookest thou
sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!

JULIET
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good nurse,
speak.

NURSE
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is 't good or bad?

NURSE  Well, you have made a simple choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he.
Though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg
excels all men's, and for a hand and a foot and a
body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy,
but I'll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at
home?

JULIET
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side! Ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jaunting up and down.

JULIET
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my
love?

NURSE  Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous--Where is your mother?

JULIET
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest:
"Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?"

NURSE  O God's lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET
Here's such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET  I have.

NURSE
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks;
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I'll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.

JULIET
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

[Enter Juliet.]

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.

JULIET
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and their men.]


BENVOLIO
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,
And if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO  Thou art like one of these fellows that, when
he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his
sword upon the table and says "God send me no
need of thee" and, by the operation of the second
cup, draws him on the drawer when indeed there is
no need.

BENVOLIO  Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO  Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy
mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be
moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO  And what to?

MERCUTIO  Nay, an there were two such, we should
have none shortly, for one would kill the other.
Thou--why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than
thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking
nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy
out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been
beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast
quarreled with a man for coughing in the street
because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain
asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor
for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With
another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon?
And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling?

BENVOLIO  An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any
man should buy the fee simple of my life for an
hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO  The fee simple? O simple!

[Enter Tybalt, Petruchio, and others.]


BENVOLIO  By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO  By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT, [to his companions]
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.--
Gentlemen, good e'en. A word with one of you.

MERCUTIO  And but one word with one of us? Couple it
with something. Make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT  You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an
you will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO  Could you not take some occasion without
giving?

TYBALT  Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels?
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear
nothing but discords. Here's my fiddlestick; here's
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

[Enter Romeo.]


TYBALT
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.

MERCUTIO
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower.
Your Worship in that sense may call him "man."

TYBALT
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.

ROMEO
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.

TYBALT
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO
I do protest I never injured thee
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO
O calm, dishonorable, vile submission!
Alla stoccato carries it away.	[He draws.]
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?

TYBALT  What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO  Good king of cats, nothing but one of your
nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as
you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher
by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT  I am for you.	[He draws.]

ROMEO
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO  Come, sir, your passado.	[They fight.]

ROMEO
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
[Romeo draws.]
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
Tybalt! Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
[Romeo attempts to beat down their rapiers.
Tybalt stabs Mercutio.]

PETRUCHIO  Away, Tybalt!
[Tybalt, Petruchio, and their followers exit.]

MERCUTIO  I am hurt.
A plague o' both houses! I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO  What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page?--Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
[Page exits.]

ROMEO
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO  No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as
a church door, but 'tis enough. 'Twill serve. Ask for
me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a
villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the
devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.

ROMEO  I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me.
I have it, and soundly, too. Your houses!
[All but Romeo exit.]

ROMEO
This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf. My reputation stained
With Tybalt's slander--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softened valor's steel.

[Enter Benvolio.]


BENVOLIO
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO
This day's black fate on more days doth depend.
This but begins the woe others must end.

[Enter Tybalt.]


BENVOLIO
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO
Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.--
Now, Tybalt, take the "villain" back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT
Thou wretched boy that didst consort him here
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO  This shall determine that.
[They fight. Tybalt falls.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, away, begone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.

ROMEO
O, I am Fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO  Why dost thou stay?
[Romeo exits.]

[Enter Citizens.]


CITIZEN
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO
There lies that Tybalt.

CITIZEN, [to Tybalt]  Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince's name, obey.

[Enter Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives and all.]


PRINCE
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET
Tybalt, my cousin, O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay--
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud
"Hold, friends! Friends, part!" and swifter than his
tongue
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.

PRINCE
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE
Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE  And for that offense
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hearts' proceeding:
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
[They exit, the Capulet men
bearing off Tybalt's body.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Juliet alone.]


JULIET
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in
night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, gentle night; come, loving black-browed
night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love
But not possessed it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.

[Enter Nurse with cords.]

O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.--
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The
cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE  Ay, ay, the cords.
[Dropping the rope ladder.]

JULIET
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE
Ah weraday, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he's gone, he's killed, he's dead.

JULIET
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE  Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,
Whoever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but "Ay,"
And that bare vowel "I" shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an "I,"
Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer "Ay."
If he be slain, say "Ay," or if not, "No."
Brief sounds determine my weal or woe.

NURSE
I saw the wound. I saw it with mine eyes
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast--
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood. I swooned at the sight.

JULIET
O break, my heart, poor bankrout, break at once!
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.

NURSE
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living if those two are gone?

NURSE
Tybalt is gone and Romeo banished.
Romeo that killed him--he is banished.

JULIET
O God, did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

NURSE
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.

JULIET
O serpent heart hid with a flow'ring face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honorable villain.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

NURSE  There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me
old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET  Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
For 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal Earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?

JULIET
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy
name
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my
husband.
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murdered me. I would forget it fain,
But, O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
"Tybalt is dead and Romeo banished."
That "banished," that one word "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said "Tybalt's dead,"
"Thy father" or "thy mother," nay, or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
"Romeo is banished." To speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banished."
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death. No words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?

NURSE
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be
spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.--
Take up those cords.
[The Nurse picks up the rope ladder.]
Poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords--come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

NURSE
Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark you, your Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him. He is hid at Lawrence' cell.

JULIET
O, find him!	[Giving the Nurse a ring.]
Give this ring to my true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamored of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.

ROMEO
What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say "death,"
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say "banishment."

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Here from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO
There is no world without Verona walls
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence "banished" is "banished from the world,"
And world's exile is death. Then "banished"
Is death mistermed. Calling death "banished,"
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden ax
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law
And turned that black word "death" to
"banishment."
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO
'Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.
They are free men, but I am banished.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground
knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to kill me? "Banished"?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin absolver, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word "banished"?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

ROMEO
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I'll give thee armor to keep off that word,
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO
Yet "banished"? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO
How should they when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy
hair
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
[Romeo throws himself down.]
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
[Knock within.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mistlike, enfold me from the search of eyes.
[Knock.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hark, how they knock!--Who's there?--Romeo,
arise.
Thou wilt be taken.--Stay awhile.--Stand up.
[Knock.]
Run to my study.--By and by.--God's will,
What simpleness is this?--I come, I come.
[Knock.]
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's
your will?

NURSE, [within]
Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [admitting the Nurse]
Welcome, then.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where's my lady's lord? Where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
There on the ground, with his own tears made
drunk.

NURSE
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.--
Stand up, stand up. Stand an you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO  Nurse.

NURSE
Ah sir, ah sir, death's the end of all.

ROMEO, [rising up]
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My concealed lady to our canceled love?

NURSE
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And "Tybalt" calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO  As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman.--O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.	[He draws his dagger.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Hold thy desperate hand!
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better tempered.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth,
Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pouts upon thy fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.--
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!--
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
[Nurse gives Romeo a ring.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
[She exits.]

ROMEO
How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go hence, good night--and here stands all your
state:
Either be gone before the watch be set
Or by the break of day disguised from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell. Good night.

ROMEO
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.]


CAPULET
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late. She'll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS
These times of woe afford no times to woo.--
Madam, good night. Commend me to your
daughter.

LADY CAPULET
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.
Tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.

CAPULET
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.--
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,
And bid her--mark you me?--on Wednesday
next--
But soft, what day is this?

PARIS  Monday, my lord.

CAPULET
Monday, ha ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
O' Thursday let it be.--O' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.--
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado: a friend or two.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET
Well, get you gone. O' Thursday be it, then.
[To Lady Capulet.] Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.--
Farewell, my lord.--Light to my chamber, ho!--
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early by and by.--Good night.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft.]


JULIET
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhaled
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet. Thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO
Let me be ta'en; let me be put to death.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye;
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come death and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is 't, my soul? Let's talk. It is not day.

JULIET
It is, it is. Hie hence, begone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad changed eyes.
O, now I would they had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
O, now begone. More light and light it grows.

ROMEO
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE  Madam.

JULIET  Nurse?

NURSE
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke; be wary; look about.	[She exits.]

JULIET
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO
Farewell, farewell. One kiss and I'll descend.
[They kiss, and Romeo descends.]

JULIET
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO  Farewell.
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET
O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.

JULIET
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails or thou lookest pale.

ROMEO
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.	[He exits.]

JULIET
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET  Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET
Who is 't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Is she not down so late or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
[Juliet descends.]

LADY CAPULET
Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET  Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of
love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET  Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.

JULIET
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET  That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET, [aside]
Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
God pardon him. I do with all my heart,
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart, so for a kinsman vexed.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him.

LADY CAPULET
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?

LADY CAPULET
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.

JULIET
Madam, in happy time! What day is that?

LADY CAPULET
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET
Now, by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I do I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

[Enter Capulet and Nurse.]


CAPULET
When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body.--How now, wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?

JULIET
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?
"Proud," and "I thank you," and "I thank you not,"
And yet "not proud"? Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow face!

LADY CAPULET  Fie, fie, what, are you mad?

JULIET, [kneeling]
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET
Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not; reply not; do not answer me.
My fingers itch.--Wife, we scarce thought us
blessed
That God had lent us but this only child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE  God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue.
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE
I speak no treason.

CAPULET  O, God 'i' g' eden!

NURSE
May not one speak?

CAPULET  Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET  You are too hot.

CAPULET  God's bread, it makes me mad.
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matched. And having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly ligned,
Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man--
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer "I'll not wed. I cannot love.
I am too young. I pray you, pardon me."
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to 't; think on 't. I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart; advise.
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to 't; bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
[He exits.]

JULIET
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of my grief?--
O sweet my mother, cast me not away.
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
[She exits.]

JULIET, [rising]
O God! O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on Earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to Earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving Earth? Comfort me; counsel me.--
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.--
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.

NURSE  Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you,
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first, or, if it did not,
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET
Speak'st thou from thy heart?

NURSE
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.

JULIET  Amen.

NURSE  What?

JULIET
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.
Go in and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Lawrence' cell
To make confession and to be absolved.

NURSE
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.	[She exits.]

JULIET
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counselor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
[She exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and County Paris.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
You say you do not know the lady's mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.

PARIS
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [aside]
I would I knew not why it should be slowed.--
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

[Enter Juliet.]


PARIS
Happily met, my lady and my wife.

JULIET
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS
That "may be" must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  That's a certain text.

PARIS
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS
So will you, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.

JULIET
It may be so, for it is not mine own.--
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.--
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS
God shield I should disturb devotion!--
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.	[He exits.]

JULIET
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
[She shows him her knife.]
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore out of thy long-experienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop'st with death himself to 'scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,
O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
(Things that to hear them told have made me
tremble),
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, then. Go home; be merry; give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
[Holding out a vial.]
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valor in the acting it.

JULIET
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [giving Juliet the vial]
Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
afford.
Farewell, dear father.
[They exit in different directions.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
two or three.]


CAPULET
So many guests invite as here are writ.
[One or two of the Servingmen exit
with Capulet's list.]
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SERVINGMAN  You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if
they can lick their fingers.

CAPULET  How canst thou try them so?

SERVINGMAN  Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET  Go, begone.	[Servingman exits.]
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.--
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE  Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.

[Enter Juliet.]


NURSE
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET
How now, my headstrong, where have you been
gadding?

JULIET
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here	[Kneeling.]
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET
Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET
Why, I am glad on 't. This is well. Stand up.
[Juliet rises.]
This is as 't should be.--Let me see the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.--
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET
Go, nurse. Go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
[Juliet and the Nurse exit.]

LADY CAPULET
We shall be short in our provision.
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once.--What ho!--
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Juliet and Nurse.]


JULIET
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
[Lady Capulet and the Nurse exit.]

JULIET
Farewell.--God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.--
Nurse!--What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.	[She takes out the vial.]
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
[She takes out her knife
and puts it down beside her.]
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp'rate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point! Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to
thee.	[She drinks and falls upon her bed
within the curtains.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

NURSE
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

[Enter old Capulet.]


CAPULET
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.--
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.

NURSE  Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed. Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
[Lady Capulet and Nurse exit.]

CAPULET
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

[Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs
and baskets.]

Now fellow,
What is there?

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

CAPULET
Make haste, make haste.	[First Servingman exits.]
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVINGMAN
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET
Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
[Second Servingman exits.]
Good faith, 'tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
[Play music.]
For so he said he would. I hear him near.--
Nurse!--Wife! What ho!--What, nurse, I say!

[Enter Nurse.]

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======

NURSE, [approaching the bed]
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!--Fast, I warrant
her, she--
Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slugabed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!--
What, not a word?--You take your pennyworths
now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little.--God forgive me,
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.--Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He'll fright you up, i' faith.--Will it not be?
[She opens the bed's curtains.]
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down
again?
I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!--
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead.--
O, weraday, that ever I was born!--
Some aqua vitae, ho!--My lord! My lady!

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What noise is here?

NURSE  O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET
What is the matter?

NURSE  Look, look!--O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET
O me! O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

[Enter Capulet.]


CAPULET
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

NURSE
She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the day!

LADY CAPULET
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead.

CAPULET
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she's cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET  O woeful time!

CAPULET
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and the County Paris, with
Musicians.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET
Ready to go, but never to return.--
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!

NURSE
O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this!
O woeful day, O woeful day!

PARIS
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced;
And weep you now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
[All but the Nurse and the Musicians exit.]

FIRST MUSICIAN
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
[Nurse exits.]

[Enter Peter.]


PETER  Musicians, O musicians, "Heart's ease,"
"Heart's ease." O, an you will have me live, play
"Heart's ease."

FIRST MUSICIAN  Why "Heart's ease?"

PETER  O musicians, because my heart itself plays "My
heart is full." O, play me some merry dump to
comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Not a dump, we. 'Tis no time to play
now.

PETER  You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN  No.

PETER  I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN  What will you give us?

PETER  No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give
you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Then will I give you the
serving-creature.

PETER  Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crochets. I'll re you, I'll fa
you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN  An you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN  Pray you, put up your dagger and
put out your wit.

PETER  Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat
you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.
Answer me like men.
[Sings.]	When griping griefs the heart doth wound
	And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
	Then music with her silver sound--
Why "silver sound"? Why "music with her silver
sound"? What say you, Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN  Marry, sir, because silver hath a
sweet sound.

PETER  Prates.--What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN  I say "silver sound" because musicians
sound for silver.

PETER  Prates too.--What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN  Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER  O, I cry you mercy. You are the singer. I will say
for you. It is "music with her silver sound" because
musicians have no gold for sounding:
[Sings.]	Then music with her silver sound
	With speedy help doth lend redress.
[He exits.]

FIRST MUSICIAN  What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN  Hang him, Jack. Come, we'll in
here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to
think!)
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

[Enter Romeo's man Balthasar, in riding boots.]

News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How doth my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR
Then she is well and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels' monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
And presently took post to tell it you.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO
Is it e'en so?--Then I deny you, stars!--
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO  Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR
No, my good lord.

ROMEO  No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
[Balthasar exits.]
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary
(And hereabouts he dwells) which late I noted
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meager were his looks.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scattered to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
"An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him."
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.--
What ho, Apothecary!

[Enter Apothecary.]


APOTHECARY  Who calls so loud?

ROMEO
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
[He offers money.]
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

APOTHECARY
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

APOTHECARY
My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

APOTHECARY, [giving him the poison]
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO, [handing him the money]
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not
sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
[Apothecary exits.]
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Friar John.]


FRIAR JOHN
Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
This same should be the voice of Friar John.--
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN
I could not send it--here it is again--
[Returning the letter.]
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.	[He exits.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Paris and his Page.]


PARIS
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.

PAGE, [aside]
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
[He moves away from Paris.]

PARIS, [scattering flowers]
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
(O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones!)
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
[Page whistles.]
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
[He steps aside.]

[Enter Romeo and Balthasar.]


ROMEO
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, begone.
But, if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
[Giving money.]
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR, [aside]
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
[He steps aside.]

ROMEO, [beginning to force open the tomb]
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.

PARIS
This is that banished haughty Montague
That murdered my love's cousin, with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
[Stepping forward.]
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O, begone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, begone, live, and hereafter say
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS
I do defy thy commination
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
[They draw and fight.]

PAGE
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
[He exits.]

PARIS
O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb; lay me with Juliet.	[He dies.]

ROMEO
In faith, I will.--Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?--O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.--
[He opens the tomb.]
A grave? O, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.--
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
[Laying Paris in the tomb.]
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry, which their keepers call
A light'ning before death! O, how may I
Call this a light'ning?--O my love, my wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered. Beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.--
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favor can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin.--Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh! Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O, you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
[Kissing Juliet.]
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavory guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Here's to my love. [Drinking.] O true apothecary,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
[He dies.]

[Enter Friar Lawrence with lantern, crow, and spade.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves!--Who's there?

BALTHASAR
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.

BALTHASAR
It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Who is it?

BALTHASAR  Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR  Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR  I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Stay, then. I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.

BALTHASAR
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [moving toward the tomb]
Romeo!--
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulcher?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.

JULIET
O comfortable friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I hear some noise.--Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,
And Paris, too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

JULIET
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
[He exits.]
What's here? A cup closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.--
O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after! I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.	[She kisses him.]
Thy lips are warm!

[Enter Paris's Page and Watch.]


FIRST WATCH  Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O, happy dagger,
This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die.
[She takes Romeo's dagger, stabs herself, and dies.]

PAGE
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH
The ground is bloody.--Search about the
churchyard.
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find, attach.
[Some watchmen exit.]
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.--
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
[Others exit.]
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

[Enter Watchmen with Romeo's man Balthasar.]


SECOND WATCH
Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the
churchyard.

FIRST WATCH
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and another Watchman.]


THIRD WATCH
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard's side.

FIRST WATCH
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

[Enter the Prince with Attendants.]


PRINCE
What misadventure is so early up
That calls our person from our morning rest?

[Enter Capulet and Lady Capulet.]


CAPULET
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?

LADY CAPULET
O, the people in the street cry "Romeo,"
Some "Juliet," and some "Paris," and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.

PRINCE
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder
comes.

FIRST WATCH
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom.

LADY CAPULET
O me, this sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulcher.

[Enter Montague.]


PRINCE
Come, Montague, for thou art early up
To see thy son and heir now early down.

MONTAGUE
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE  Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE, [seeing Romeo dead]
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE
Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true
descent,
And then will I be general of your woes
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.--
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
I married them, and their stol'n marriage day
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident, and yesternight
Returned my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy. And if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time
Unto the rigor of severest law.

PRINCE
We still have known thee for a holy man.--
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?

BALTHASAR
I brought my master news of Juliet's death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE
Give me the letter. I will look on it.--
[He takes Romeo's letter.]
Where is the County's page, that raised the
watch?--
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE
This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?--Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love,
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.

CAPULET
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE  But I can give thee more,
For I will ray her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
[All exit.]

The Merchant of Venice
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/the-merchant-of-venice/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
PORTIA, an heiress of Belmont
NERISSA, her waiting-gentlewoman
Servants to Portia:
  BALTHAZAR
  STEPHANO
Suitors to Portia:
  Prince of MOROCCO
  Prince of ARRAGON
ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
BASSANIO, a Venetian gentleman, suitor to Portia
Companions of Antonio and Bassanio:
  SOLANIO
  SALARINO
  GRATIANO
  LORENZO
LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
SHYLOCK, a Jewish moneylender in Venice
JESSICA, his daughter
TUBAL, another Jewish moneylender
LANCELET GOBBO, servant to Shylock and later to Bassanio
OLD GOBBO, Lancelet's father
SALERIO, a messenger from Venice
Jailer
Duke of Venice
Magnificoes of Venice
Servants
Attendants and followers
Messenger
Musicians


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Antonio, Salarino, and Solanio.]


ANTONIO
In sooth I know not why I am so sad.
It wearies me, you say it wearies you.
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
I am to learn.
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
That I have much ado to know myself.

SALARINO
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies with portly sail
(Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea)
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.

SOLANIO
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Piring in maps for ports and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

SALARINO  My wind cooling my broth
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy hourglass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edifice of stone
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And, in a word, but even now worth this
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?
But tell not me: I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

ANTONIO
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

SOLANIO
Why then you are in love.

ANTONIO  Fie, fie!

SOLANIO
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed
Janus,
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper,
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

[Enter Bassanio, Lorenzo, and Gratiano.]

Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare you well.
We leave you now with better company.

SALARINO
I would have stayed till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

ANTONIO
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace th' occasion to depart.

SALARINO
Good morrow, my good lords.

BASSANIO
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say,
when?
You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?

SALARINO
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

LORENZO
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you. But at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

BASSANIO
I will not fail you.

GRATIANO
You look not well, Signior Antonio.
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvelously changed.

ANTONIO
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

GRATIANO  Let me play the fool.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio
(I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond
And do a willful stillness entertain
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say "I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark."
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers
fools.
I'll tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.--
Come, good Lorenzo.--Fare you well a while.
I'll end my exhortation after dinner.

LORENZO
Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

GRATIANO
Well, keep me company but two years more,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own
tongue.

ANTONIO
Fare you well. I'll grow a talker for this gear.

GRATIANO
Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
[Gratiano and Lorenzo exit.]

ANTONIO  Is that anything now?

BASSANIO  Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing,
more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as
two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you
shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you
have them, they are not worth the search.

ANTONIO
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you today promised to tell me of?

BASSANIO
'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged
From such a noble rate. But my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

ANTONIO
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
Within the eye of honor, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.

BASSANIO
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and, like a willful youth,
That which I owe is lost. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim, or to find both
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

ANTONIO
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Than if you had made waste of all I have.
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it. Therefore speak.

BASSANIO
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages.
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate!

ANTONIO
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Neither have I money nor commodity
To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth:
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be racked even to the uttermost
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I,
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia with her waiting woman Nerissa.]


PORTIA  By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary
of this great world.

NERISSA  You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries
were in the same abundance as your good fortunes
are. And yet, for aught I see, they are as sick that
surfeit with too much as they that starve with
nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
seated in the mean. Superfluity comes sooner by
white hairs, but competency lives longer.

PORTIA  Good sentences, and well pronounced.

NERISSA  They would be better if well followed.

PORTIA  If to do were as easy as to know what were
good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor
men's cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine
that follows his own instructions. I can easier teach
twenty what were good to be done than to be one of
the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain
may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper
leaps o'er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the
youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the
cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
choose me a husband. O, me, the word "choose"! I
may neither choose who I would nor refuse who I
dislike. So is the will of a living daughter curbed by
the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that
I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

NERISSA  Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men
at their death have good inspirations. Therefore the
lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of
gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his
meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be
chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly
love. But what warmth is there in your affection
towards any of these princely suitors that are already
come?

PORTIA  I pray thee, overname them, and as thou
namest them, I will describe them, and according
to my description level at my affection.

NERISSA  First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

PORTIA  Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but
talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation
to his own good parts that he can shoe him
himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother
played false with a smith.

NERISSA  Then is there the County Palatine.

PORTIA  He doth nothing but frown, as who should say
"An you will not have me, choose." He hears
merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the
weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had
rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in
his mouth than to either of these. God defend me
from these two!

NERISSA  How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le
Bon?

PORTIA  God made him, and therefore let him pass for
a man. In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker,
but he!--why, he hath a horse better than the
Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than
the Count Palatine. He is every man in no man. If a
throstle sing, he falls straight a-cap'ring. He will
fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I
should marry twenty husbands! If he would despise
me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to
madness, I shall never requite him.

NERISSA  What say you then to Falconbridge, the young
baron of England?

PORTIA  You know I say nothing to him, for he understands
not me, nor I him. He hath neither Latin,
French, nor Italian; and you will come into the
court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in
the English. He is a proper man's picture, but alas,
who can converse with a dumb show? How oddly
he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy,
his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany,
and his behavior everywhere.

NERISSA  What think you of the Scottish lord, his
neighbor?

PORTIA  That he hath a neighborly charity in him, for
he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman,
and swore he would pay him again when he was
able. I think the Frenchman became his surety and
sealed under for another.

NERISSA  How like you the young German, the Duke of
Saxony's nephew?

PORTIA  Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober,
and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk.
When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and
when he is worst he is little better than a beast. An
the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift
to go without him.

NERISSA  If he should offer to choose, and choose the
right casket, you should refuse to perform your
father's will if you should refuse to accept him.

PORTIA  Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set
a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary
casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation
without, I know he will choose it. I will do
anything, Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.

NERISSA  You need not fear, lady, the having any of
these lords. They have acquainted me with their
determinations, which is indeed to return to their
home and to trouble you with no more suit, unless
you may be won by some other sort than your
father's imposition depending on the caskets.

PORTIA  If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as
chaste as Diana unless I be obtained by the manner
of my father's will. I am glad this parcel of wooers
are so reasonable, for there is not one among them
but I dote on his very absence. And I pray God
grant them a fair departure!

NERISSA  Do you not remember, lady, in your father's
time, a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came
hither in company of the Marquess of Montferrat?

PORTIA  Yes, yes, it was Bassanio--as I think so was he
called.

NERISSA  True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my
foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a
fair lady.

PORTIA  I remember him well, and I remember him
worthy of thy praise.

[Enter a Servingman.]

How now, what news?

SERVINGMAN  The four strangers seek for you, madam,
to take their leave. And there is a forerunner come
from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings
word the Prince his master will be here tonight.

PORTIA  If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good
heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should
be glad of his approach. If he have the condition of
a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather
he should shrive me than wive me.
Come, Nerissa. [To Servingman.] Sirrah, go before.--
Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another
knocks at the door.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Bassanio with Shylock the Jew.]


SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats, well.

BASSANIO  Ay, sir, for three months.

SHYLOCK  For three months, well.

BASSANIO  For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall
be bound.

SHYLOCK  Antonio shall become bound, well.

BASSANIO  May you stead me? Will you pleasure me?
Shall I know your answer?

SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats for three months,
and Antonio bound.

BASSANIO  Your answer to that?

SHYLOCK  Antonio is a good man.

BASSANIO  Have you heard any imputation to the
contrary?

SHYLOCK  Ho, no, no, no, no! My meaning in saying he
is a good man is to have you understand me that he
is sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition: he
hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the
Indies. I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto,
he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and
other ventures he hath squandered abroad. But
ships are but boards, sailors but men; there be land
rats and water rats, water thieves and land
thieves--I mean pirates--and then there is the
peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is,
notwithstanding, sufficient. Three thousand ducats.
I think I may take his bond.

BASSANIO  Be assured you may.

SHYLOCK  I will be assured I may. And that I may be
assured, I will bethink me. May I speak with
Antonio?

BASSANIO  If it please you to dine with us.

SHYLOCK  Yes, to smell pork! To eat of the habitation
which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the
devil into! I will buy with you, sell with you, talk
with you, walk with you, and so following; but I
will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with
you.--What news on the Rialto?--Who is he comes
here?

[Enter Antonio.]


BASSANIO  This is Signior Antonio.

SHYLOCK, [aside]
How like a fawning publican he looks!
I hate him for he is a Christian,
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls "interest." Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!

BASSANIO  Shylock, do you hear?

SHYLOCK
I am debating of my present store,
And, by the near guess of my memory,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. But soft, how many months
Do you desire? [To Antonio.] Rest you fair, good
signior!
Your Worship was the last man in our mouths.

ANTONIO
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I'll break a custom. [To Bassanio.] Is he yet
possessed
How much you would?

SHYLOCK  Ay, ay, three thousand
ducats.

ANTONIO  And for three months.

SHYLOCK
I had forgot--three months. [To Bassanio.]
You told me so.--
Well then, your bond. And let me see--but hear
you:
Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

ANTONIO  I do never use it.

SHYLOCK
When Jacob grazed his Uncle Laban's sheep--
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wise mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possessor; ay, he was the third--

ANTONIO
And what of him? Did he take interest?

SHYLOCK
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Directly "interest." Mark what Jacob did.
When Laban and himself were compromised
That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied
Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes being rank
In end of autumn turned to the rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skillful shepherd pilled me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
Fall parti-colored lambs, and those were Jacob's.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

ANTONIO
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?

SHYLOCK
I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
But note me, signior--

ANTONIO, [aside to Bassanio]
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose!
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!

SHYLOCK
Three thousand ducats. 'Tis a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see, the
rate--

ANTONIO
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?

SHYLOCK
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug
(For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe).
You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then. You come to me and you say
"Shylock, we would have moneys"--you say so,
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold. Moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
"Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?" Or
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman's key,
With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
Say this: "Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday
last;
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me 'dog'; and for these courtesies
I'll lend you thus much moneys"?

ANTONIO
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee, too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face
Exact the penalty.

SHYLOCK  Why, look you how you storm!
I would be friends with you and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stained me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me!
This is kind I offer.

BASSANIO  This were kindness!

SHYLOCK  This kindness will I show.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.

ANTONIO
Content, in faith. I'll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

BASSANIO
You shall not seal to such a bond for me!
I'll rather dwell in my necessity.

ANTONIO
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it!
Within these two months--that's a month before
This bond expires--I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

SHYLOCK
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others! Pray you tell me this:
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favor I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu;
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.

ANTONIO
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.

SHYLOCK
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's.
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
I'll be with you.

ANTONIO  Hie thee, gentle Jew.
[Shylock exits.]
The Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.

BASSANIO
I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.

ANTONIO
Come on, in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Prince of Morocco, a tawny Moor all in
white, and three or four followers accordingly, with
Portia, Nerissa, and their train.]


MOROCCO
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,
To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Hath feared the valiant; by my love I swear
The best regarded virgins of our clime
Have loved it too. I would not change this hue
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.

PORTIA
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
But if my father had not scanted me
And hedged me by his wit to yield myself
His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
Yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
As any comer I have looked on yet
For my affection.

MOROCCO  Even for that I thank you.
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the Earth,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand;
So is Alcides beaten by his page,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.

PORTIA  You must take your chance
And either not attempt to choose at all
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.

MOROCCO
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.

PORTIA
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

MOROCCO  Good fortune then,
To make me blest--or cursed'st among men!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lancelet Gobbo the Clown, alone.]


LANCELET  Certainly my conscience will serve me to
run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine
elbow and tempts me, saying to me "Gobbo,
Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet," or "good Gobbo,"
or "good Lancelet Gobbo, use your legs, take
the start, run away." My conscience says "No. Take
heed, honest Lancelet, take heed, honest Gobbo,"
or, as aforesaid, "honest Lancelet Gobbo, do not
run; scorn running with thy heels." Well, the most
courageous fiend bids me pack. "Fia!" says the
fiend. "Away!" says the fiend. "For the heavens,
rouse up a brave mind," says the fiend, "and run!"
Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
heart, says very wisely to me "My honest friend
Lancelet, being an honest man's son"--or rather,
an honest woman's son, for indeed my father did
something smack, something grow to--he had a
kind of taste--well, my conscience says "Lancelet,
budge not." "Budge," says the fiend. "Budge not,"
says my conscience. "Conscience," say I, "you
counsel well." "Fiend," say I, "you counsel well."
To be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the
Jew my master, who (God bless the mark) is a kind
of devil; and to run away from the Jew, I should be
ruled by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is
the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil
incarnation, and, in my conscience, my conscience
is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel
me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more
friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at
your commandment. I will run.

[Enter old Gobbo with a basket.]


GOBBO  Master young man, you, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELET, [aside]  O heavens, this is my true begotten
father, who being more than sandblind, high gravelblind,
knows me not. I will try confusions with him.

GOBBO  Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELET  Turn up on your right hand at the next
turning, but at the next turning of all on your left;
marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jew's house.

GOBBO  Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit.
Can you tell me whether one Lancelet, that dwells
with him, dwell with him or no?

LANCELET  Talk you of young Master Lancelet? [Aside.]
Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.--Talk
you of young Master Lancelet?

GOBBO  No master, sir, but a poor man's son. His
father, though I say 't, is an honest exceeding poor
man and, God be thanked, well to live.

LANCELET  Well, let his father be what he will, we talk
of young Master Lancelet.

GOBBO  Your Worship's friend, and Lancelet, sir.

LANCELET  But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech
you, talk you of young Master Lancelet?

GOBBO  Of Lancelet, an 't please your mastership.

LANCELET  Ergo, Master Lancelet. Talk not of Master
Lancelet, father, for the young gentleman, according
to Fates and Destinies, and such odd sayings, the
Sisters Three, and such branches of learning, is
indeed deceased, or, as you would say in plain
terms, gone to heaven.

GOBBO  Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff
of my age, my very prop.

LANCELET, [aside]  Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post,
a staff or a prop?--Do you know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman.
But I pray you tell me, is my boy, God rest his
soul, alive or dead?

LANCELET  Do you not know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack, sir, I am sandblind. I know you not.

LANCELET  Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might
fail of the knowing me. It is a wise father that
knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you
news of your son. [He kneels.] Give me your blessing.
Truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid
long--a man's son may, but in the end, truth will
out.

GOBBO  Pray you, sir, stand up! I am sure you are not
Lancelet my boy.

LANCELET  Pray you, let's have no more fooling about
it, but give me your blessing. I am Lancelet, your
boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall
be.

GOBBO  I cannot think you are my son.

LANCELET  I know not what I shall think of that; but I
am Lancelet, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery
your wife is my mother.

GOBBO  Her name is Margery, indeed. I'll be sworn if
thou be Lancelet, thou art mine own flesh and
blood. Lord worshiped might He be, what a beard
hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin
than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.

LANCELET, [standing up]  It should seem, then, that
Dobbin's tail grows backward. I am sure he had
more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I
last saw him.

GOBBO  Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou
and thy master agree? I have brought him a present.
How 'gree you now?

LANCELET  Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have
set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I
have run some ground. My master's a very Jew.
Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am
famished in his service. You may tell every finger I
have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come!
Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who
indeed gives rare new liveries. If I serve not him, I
will run as far as God has any ground. O rare
fortune, here comes the man! To him, father, for I
am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.

[Enter Bassanio with Leonardo and a follower or two.]


BASSANIO, [to an Attendant]  You may do so, but let it be
so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five
of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the
liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come
anon to my lodging.	[The Attendant exits.]

LANCELET  To him, father.

GOBBO, [to Bassanio]  God bless your Worship.

BASSANIO  Gramercy. Wouldst thou aught with me?

GOBBO  Here's my son, sir, a poor boy--

LANCELET  Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man,
that would, sir, as my father shall specify--

GOBBO  He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say,
to serve--

LANCELET  Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the
Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify--

GOBBO  His master and he (saving your Worship's
reverence) are scarce cater-cousins--

LANCELET  To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew,
having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my
father being, I hope, an old man, shall frutify unto
you--

GOBBO  I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow
upon your Worship, and my suit is--

LANCELET  In very brief, the suit is impertinent to
myself, as your Worship shall know by this honest
old man, and though I say it, though old man yet
poor man, my father--

BASSANIO  One speak for both. What would you?

LANCELET  Serve you, sir.

GOBBO  That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

BASSANIO, [to Lancelet]
I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jew's service, to become
The follower of so poor a gentleman.

LANCELET  The old proverb is very well parted between
my master Shylock and you, sir: you have "the
grace of God," sir, and he hath "enough."

BASSANIO
Thou speak'st it well.--Go, father, with thy son.--
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
My lodging out. [To an Attendant.] Give him a livery
More guarded than his fellows'. See it done.
[Attendant exits. Bassanio and Leonardo talk apart.]

LANCELET  Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have
ne'er a tongue in my head! Well, [studying his palm]
if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth
offer to swear upon a book--I shall have good
fortune, go to! Here's a simple line of life. Here's a
small trifle of wives--alas, fifteen wives is nothing;
eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in
for one man--and then to 'scape drowning
thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a
featherbed! Here are simple 'scapes. Well, if Fortune
be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear.
Father, come. I'll take my leave of the Jew in the
twinkling.	[Lancelet and old Gobbo exit.]

BASSANIO
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
[Handing him a paper.]
These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.

LEONARDO
My best endeavors shall be done herein.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO, [to Leonardo]  Where's your master?

LEONARDO  Yonder, sir, he walks.	[Leonardo exits.]

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio!

BASSANIO  Gratiano!

GRATIANO  I have suit to you.

BASSANIO  You have obtained it.

GRATIANO  You must not deny me. I must go with you
to Belmont.

BASSANIO
Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice--
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults.
But where thou art not known--why, there they
show
Something too liberal. Pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior
I be misconstered in the place I go to,
And lose my hopes.

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio, hear me.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say "amen,"
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his grandam, never trust me more.

BASSANIO  Well, we shall see your bearing.

GRATIANO
Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.

BASSANIO  No, that were pity.
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well.
I have some business.

GRATIANO
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest.
But we will visit you at supper time.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Jessica and Lancelet Gobbo.]


JESSICA
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
Our house is hell and thou, a merry devil,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
But fare thee well. There is a ducat for thee,
And, Lancelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.
Give him this letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.

LANCELET  Adieu. Tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful
pagan, most sweet Jew. If a Christian do not
play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.
But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown
my manly spirit. Adieu.

JESSICA  Farewell, good Lancelet.
[Lancelet exits.]
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father's child?
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
[She exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino, and Solanio.]


LORENZO
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.

GRATIANO
We have not made good preparation.

SALARINO
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.

SOLANIO
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

LORENZO
'Tis now but four o'clock. We have two hours
To furnish us.

[Enter Lancelet.]

Friend Lancelet, what's the news?

LANCELET  An it shall please you to break up this, it
shall seem to signify.	[Handing him Jessica's letter.]

LORENZO
I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.

GRATIANO  Love news, in faith!

LANCELET  By your leave, sir.

LORENZO  Whither goest thou?

LANCELET  Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to
sup tonight with my new master the Christian.

LORENZO
Hold here, take this. [Giving him money.] Tell gentle
Jessica
I will not fail her. Speak it privately.
[Lancelet exits.]
Go, gentlemen,
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
I am provided of a torchbearer.

SALARINO
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.

SOLANIO
And so will I.

LORENZO  Meet me and Gratiano
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.

SALARINO  'Tis good we do so.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

GRATIANO
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?

LORENZO
I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
How I shall take her from her father's house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What page's suit she hath in readiness.
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me. Peruse this as thou goest;
[Handing him the letter.]
Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Shylock, the Jew, and Lancelet,
his man that was, the Clown.]


SHYLOCK
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.--
What, Jessica!--Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me--what, Jessica!--
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.--
Why, Jessica, I say!

LANCELET  Why, Jessica!

SHYLOCK
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

LANCELET  Your Worship was wont to tell me I could
do nothing without bidding.

[Enter Jessica.]


JESSICA  Call you? What is your will?

SHYLOCK
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica.
There are my keys.--But wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love. They flatter me.
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian.--Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house.--I am right loath to go.
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money bags tonight.

LANCELET  I beseech you, sir, go. My young master
doth expect your reproach.

SHYLOCK  So do I his.

LANCELET  And they have conspired together--I will
not say you shall see a masque, but if you do, then it
was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on
Black Monday last, at six o'clock i' th' morning,
falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four
year in th' afternoon.

SHYLOCK
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces,
But stop my house's ears (I mean my casements).
Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob's staff I swear
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight.
But I will go.--Go you before me, sirrah.
Say I will come.

LANCELET  I will go before, sir. [Aside to Jessica.] Mistress,
look out at window for all this.
There will come a Christian by
Will be worth a Jewess' eye.	[He exits.]

SHYLOCK
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?

JESSICA
His words were "Farewell, mistress," nothing else.

SHYLOCK
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More than the wildcat. Drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in.
Perhaps I will return immediately.
Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you.
Fast bind, fast find--
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.	[He exits.]

JESSICA
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.
[She exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter the masquers, Gratiano and Salarino.]


GRATIANO
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.

SALARINO  His hour is almost past.

GRATIANO
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

SALARINO
O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
To seal love's bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited.

GRATIANO
That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untread again
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugged and embraced by the strumpet wind;
How like the prodigal doth she return
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!

[Enter Lorenzo.]


SALARINO
Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.

LORENZO
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
Not I but my affairs have made you wait.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
I'll watch as long for you then. Approach.
Here dwells my father Jew.--Ho! Who's within?

[Enter Jessica above, dressed as a boy.]


JESSICA
Who are you? Tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.

LORENZO  Lorenzo, and thy love.

JESSICA
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? And now who knows
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

LORENZO
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

JESSICA
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange.
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

LORENZO
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.

JESSICA
What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscured.

LORENZO  So are you, sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,
For the close night doth play the runaway,
And we are stayed for at Bassanio's feast.

JESSICA
I will make fast the doors and gild myself
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
[Jessica exits, above.]

GRATIANO
Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew!

LORENZO
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath proved herself.
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

[Enter Jessica, below.]

What, art thou come? On, gentleman, away!
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
[All but Gratiano exit.]

[Enter Antonio.]


ANTONIO  Who's there?

GRATIANO  Signior Antonio?

ANTONIO
Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
'Tis nine o'clock! Our friends all stay for you.
No masque tonight; the wind is come about;
Bassanio presently will go aboard.
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

GRATIANO
I am glad on 't. I desire no more delight
Than to be under sail and gone tonight.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Portia with the Prince of Morocco and both
their trains.]


PORTIA
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
[A curtain is drawn.]
Now make your choice.

MOROCCO
This first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire";
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves";
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

PORTIA
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

MOROCCO
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
I will survey th' inscriptions back again.
What says this leaden casket?
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
Must give--for what? For lead? Hazard for lead?
This casket threatens. Men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages.
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross.
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
As much as he deserves--pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
If thou beest rated by thy estimation,
Thou dost deserve enough; and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the lady.
And yet to be afeard of my deserving
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
As much as I deserve--why, that's the lady!
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding,
But more than these, in love I do deserve.
What if I strayed no farther, but chose here?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her.
From the four corners of the Earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal, breathing saint.
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
For princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As o'er a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is 't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. It were too gross
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
O, sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an angel
Stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon;
But here an angel in a golden bed
Lies all within.--Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

PORTIA
There, take it, prince. [Handing him the key.] And if
my form lie there,
Then I am yours.
	[Morocco opens the gold casket.]

MOROCCO  O hell! What have we here?
A carrion death within whose empty eye
There is a written scroll. I'll read the writing:
	All that glisters is not gold--
	Often have you heard that told.
	Many a man his life hath sold
	But my outside to behold.
	Gilded tombs do worms infold.
	Had you been as wise as bold,
	Young in limbs, in judgment old,
	Your answer had not been enscrolled.
	Fare you well, your suit is cold.
Cold indeed and labor lost!
Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.
Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.
[He exits, with his train.]

PORTIA
A gentle riddance! Draw the curtains, go.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Salarino and Solanio.]


SALARINO
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

SOLANIO
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.

SALARINO
He came too late; the ship was under sail.
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

SOLANIO
I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
"My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter,
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter,
And jewels--two stones, two rich and precious
stones--
Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl!
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats."

SALARINO
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying "His stones, his daughter, and his ducats."

SOLANIO
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.

SALARINO  Marry, well remembered.
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday
Who told me, in the Narrow Seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught.
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.

SOLANIO
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear--
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

SALARINO
A kinder gentleman treads not the Earth.
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part.
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered "Do not so.
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time;
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love.
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there."
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio's hand--and so they parted.

SOLANIO
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

SALARINO  Do we so.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter Nerissa and a Servitor.]


NERISSA
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath
And comes to his election presently.

[Enter the Prince of Arragon, his train, and Portia.]


PORTIA
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince.
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

ARRAGON
I am enjoined by oath to observe three things:
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.

PORTIA
To these injunctions everyone doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

ARRAGON
And so have I addressed me. Fortune now
To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
What many men desire--that "many" may be
meant
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and road of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not jump with common spirits
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then, to thee, thou silver treasure house.
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
And well said, too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
O, that estates, degrees, and offices
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? And how much honor
Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new varnished? Well, but to my choice.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
[He is given a key.]
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
[He opens the silver casket.]

PORTIA
Too long a pause for that which you find there.

ARRAGON
What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.--
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings.
"Who chooseth me shall have as much as he
deserves"?
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?

PORTIA
To offend and judge are distinct offices
And of opposed natures.

ARRAGON  What is here?
[He reads.]

	The fire seven times tried this;
	Seven times tried that judgment is
	That did never choose amiss.
	Some there be that shadows kiss;
	Such have but a shadow's bliss.
	There be fools alive, iwis,
	Silvered o'er--and so was this.
	Take what wife you will to bed,
	I will ever be your head.
	So begone; you are sped.
Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool's head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroth.	[He exits with his train.]

PORTIA
Thus hath the candle singed the moth.
O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

NERISSA
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

PORTIA  Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Where is my lady?

PORTIA  Here. What would my
lord?

MESSENGER
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th' approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath),
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

PORTIA
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him!
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.

NERISSA
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Solanio and Salarino.]


SOLANIO  Now, what news on the Rialto?

SALARINO  Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio
hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the
Narrow Seas--the Goodwins, I think they call the
place--a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the
carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say,
if my gossip Report be an honest woman of her
word.

SOLANIO  I would she were as lying a gossip in that as
ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe
she wept for the death of a third husband. But
it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing
the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio,
the honest Antonio--O, that I had a title good
enough to keep his name company!--

SALARINO  Come, the full stop.

SOLANIO  Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he
hath lost a ship.

SALARINO  I would it might prove the end of his losses.

SOLANIO  Let me say "amen" betimes, lest the devil
cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness
of a Jew.

[Enter Shylock.]

How now, Shylock, what news among the
merchants?

SHYLOCK  You knew, none so well, none so well as you,
of my daughter's flight.

SALARINO  That's certain. I for my part knew the tailor
that made the wings she flew withal.

SOLANIO  And Shylock for his own part knew the bird
was fledge, and then it is the complexion of them
all to leave the dam.

SHYLOCK  She is damned for it.

SALARINO  That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.

SHYLOCK  My own flesh and blood to rebel!

SOLANIO  Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these
years?

SHYLOCK  I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.

SALARINO  There is more difference between thy flesh
and hers than between jet and ivory, more between
your bloods than there is between red wine and
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio
have had any loss at sea or no?

SHYLOCK  There I have another bad match! A bankrout,
a prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on
the Rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug
upon the mart! Let him look to his bond. He was
wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He
was wont to lend money for a Christian cur'sy; let
him look to his bond.

SALARINO  Why, I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not
take his flesh! What's that good for?

SHYLOCK  To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else,
it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me and
hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses,
mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted
my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies--
and what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not
a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions,
senses, affections, passions? Fed with the
same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to
the same diseases, healed by the same means,
warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer
as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not
bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you
poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall
we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will
resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian,
what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian wrong
a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian
example? Why, revenge! The villainy you teach me I
will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better the
instruction.

[Enter a man from Antonio.]


SERVINGMAN  Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his
house and desires to speak with you both.

SALARINO  We have been up and down to seek him.

[Enter Tubal.]


SOLANIO  Here comes another of the tribe; a third
cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn
Jew.
[Salarino, Solanio, and the Servingman exit.]

SHYLOCK  How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa?
Hast thou found my daughter?

TUBAL  I often came where I did hear of her, but
cannot find her.

SHYLOCK  Why, there, there, there, there! A diamond
gone cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfurt!
The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in that,
and other precious, precious jewels! I would my
daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her
ear; would she were hearsed at my foot and the
ducats in her coffin. No news of them? Why so? And
I know not what's spent in the search! Why, thou
loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so
much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no
revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a' my
shoulders, no sighs but a' my breathing, no tears but
a' my shedding.

TUBAL  Yes, other men have ill luck, too. Antonio, as I
heard in Genoa--

SHYLOCK  What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?

TUBAL  --hath an argosy cast away coming from
Tripolis.

SHYLOCK  I thank God, I thank God! Is it true, is it true?

TUBAL  I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped
the wrack.

SHYLOCK  I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good
news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa--

TUBAL  Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one
night fourscore ducats.

SHYLOCK  Thou stick'st a dagger in me. I shall never
see my gold again. Fourscore ducats at a sitting,
fourscore ducats!

TUBAL  There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my
company to Venice that swear he cannot choose
but break.

SHYLOCK  I am very glad of it. I'll plague him, I'll
torture him. I am glad of it.

TUBAL  One of them showed me a ring that he had of
your daughter for a monkey.

SHYLOCK  Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It
was my turquoise! I had it of Leah when I was a
bachelor. I would not have given it for a wilderness
of monkeys.

TUBAL  But Antonio is certainly undone.

SHYLOCK  Nay, that's true, that's very true. Go, Tubal,
fee me an officer. Bespeak him a fortnight before. I
will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he
out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good
Tubal, at our synagogue, Tubal.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bassanio, Portia, and all their trains, Gratiano,
Nerissa.]


PORTIA
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
There's something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you, and you know yourself
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But lest you should not understand me well
(And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought)
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
So will I never be. So may you miss me.
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o'erlooked me and divided me.
One half of me is yours, the other half yours--
Mine own, I would say--but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours. O, these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

BASSANIO  Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

PORTIA
Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

BASSANIO
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love.
There may as well be amity and life
'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.

PORTIA
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.

BASSANIO
Promise me life and I'll confess the truth.

PORTIA
Well, then, confess and live.

BASSANIO  "Confess and love"
Had been the very sum of my confession.
O happy torment, when my torturer
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

PORTIA
Away, then. I am locked in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.--
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.
Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And wat'ry deathbed for him. He may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
To a new-crowned monarch. Such it is
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
With no less presence but with much more love
Than young Alcides when he did redeem
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages, come forth to view
The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules!
Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.

[A song the whilst Bassanio comments on
the caskets to himself.]



	Tell me where is fancy bred,
	Or in the heart, or in the head?
	How begot, how nourished?
	   Reply, reply.
	It is engendered in the eye,
	With gazing fed, and fancy dies
	In the cradle where it lies.
	Let us all ring fancy's knell.
	I'll begin it.--Ding, dong, bell.

ALL	Ding, dong, bell.

BASSANIO
So may the outward shows be least themselves;
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valor's excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it.
So are those crisped snaky golden locks,
Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore, then, thou gaudy
gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee.
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
'Tween man and man. But thou, thou meager lead,
Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
[Bassanio is given a key.]

PORTIA, [aside]
How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts and rash embraced despair,
And shudd'ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy!
O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,
For fear I surfeit.
[Bassanio opens the lead casket.]

BASSANIO  What find I here?
Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demigod
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips
Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!
How could he see to do them? Having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.
[He reads the scroll.]
	You that choose not by the view
	Chance as fair and choose as true.
	Since this fortune falls to you,
	Be content and seek no new.
	If you be well pleased with this
	And hold your fortune for your bliss,
	Turn you where your lady is,
	And claim her with a loving kiss.
A gentle scroll! Fair lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give and to receive.
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no,
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

PORTIA
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am. Though for myself alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
To wish myself much better, yet for you
I would be trebled twenty times myself,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich, that only to stand high in your account
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account. But the full sum of me
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours, my lord's. I give them with this ring,
[Handing him a ring.]
Which, when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

BASSANIO
Madam, you have bereft me of all words.
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved prince there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!

NERISSA
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry "Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!"

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
For I am sure you can wish none from me.
And when your honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

BASSANIO
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

GRATIANO
I thank your Lordship, you have got me one.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
You loved, I loved; for intermission
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine, too, as the matter falls.
For wooing here until I sweat again,
And swearing till my very roof was dry
With oaths of love, at last (if promise last)
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achieved her mistress.

PORTIA  Is this true, Nerissa?

NERISSA
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.

BASSANIO
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?

GRATIANO  Yes, faith, my lord.

BASSANIO
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.

GRATIANO  We'll play with them the first boy for a
thousand ducats.

NERISSA  What, and stake down?

GRATIANO  No, we shall ne'er win at that sport and
stake down.

[Enter Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio, a messenger
from Venice.]

But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?

BASSANIO
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither--
If that the youth of my new int'rest here
Have power to bid you welcome. [To Portia.] By
your leave,
I bid my very friends and countrymen,
Sweet Portia, welcome.

PORTIA
So do I, my lord. They are entirely welcome.

LORENZO, [to Bassanio]
I thank your Honor. For my part, my lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay
To come with him along.

SALERIO  I did, my lord,
And I have reason for it.	[Handing him a paper.]
Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.

BASSANIO  Ere I ope his letter,
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

SALERIO
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there
Will show you his estate.
[Bassanio opens the letter.]

GRATIANO
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.--
Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
I know he will be glad of our success.
We are the Jasons, we have won the Fleece.

SALERIO
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.

PORTIA
There are some shrewd contents in yond same
paper
That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek.
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?--
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.

BASSANIO  O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins: I was a gentleman.
And then I told you true; and yet, dear lady,
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a braggart. When I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
I have engaged myself to a dear friend,
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life blood.--But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures failed? What, not one hit?
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch
Of merchant-marring rocks?

SALERIO  Not one, my lord.
Besides, it should appear that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

JESSICA
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. And I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio.

PORTIA
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

BASSANIO
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
The ancient Roman honor more appears
Than any that draws breath in Italy.

PORTIA  What sum owes he the Jew?

BASSANIO
For me, three thousand ducats.

PORTIA  What, no more?
Pay him six thousand and deface the bond.
Double six thousand and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend!
For never shall you lie by Portia's side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.

BASSANIO [reads]
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my
creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to
the Jew is forfeit, and since in paying it, it is impossible
I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if
I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use
your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to
come, let not my letter.

PORTIA
O love, dispatch all business and begone!

BASSANIO
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make haste. But till I come again,
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Shylock, the Jew, and Solanio, and Antonio,
and the Jailer.]


SHYLOCK
Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Jailer, look to him.

ANTONIO  Hear me yet, good Shylock--

SHYLOCK
I'll have my bond. Speak not against my bond.
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs.
The Duke shall grant me justice.--I do wonder,
Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

ANTONIO  I pray thee, hear me speak--

SHYLOCK
I'll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak.
I'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors. Follow not!
I'll have no speaking. I will have my bond.	[He exits.]

SOLANIO
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.

ANTONIO  Let him alone.
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
He seeks my life. His reason well I know:
I oft delivered from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me.
Therefore he hates me.

SOLANIO  I am sure the Duke
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.

ANTONIO
The Duke cannot deny the course of law,
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of the state,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go.
These griefs and losses have so bated me
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.--
Well, jailer, on.--Pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Portia, Nerissa, Lorenzo, Jessica, and Balthazar,
a man of Portia's.]


LORENZO
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Than customary bounty can enforce you.

PORTIA
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty!
This comes too near the praising of myself;
Therefore no more of it. Hear other things:
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord's return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord's return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

LORENZO  Madam, with all my heart.
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

PORTIA
My people do already know my mind
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
So fare you well till we shall meet again.

LORENZO
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

JESSICA
I wish your Ladyship all heart's content.

PORTIA
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
[Lorenzo and Jessica exit.]
Now, Balthazar,
As I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
And use thou all th' endeavor of a man
In speed to Padua. See thou render this
Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario.
[She gives him a paper.]
And look what notes and garments he doth give
thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed
Unto the traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.

BALTHAZAR
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.	[He exits.]

PORTIA
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of. We'll see our husbands
Before they think of us.

NERISSA  Shall they see us?

PORTIA
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
When we are both accoutered like young men,
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride, and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies
How honorable ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died--
I could not do withal!--then I'll repent,
And wish, for all that, that I had not killed them.
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks
Which I will practice.

NERISSA  Why, shall we turn to men?

PORTIA  Fie, what a question's that,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles today.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lancelet, the Clown, and Jessica.]


LANCELET  Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father
are to be laid upon the children. Therefore I
promise you I fear you. I was always plain with you,
and so now I speak my agitation of the matter.
Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you
are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do
you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope
neither.

JESSICA  And what hope is that, I pray thee?

LANCELET  Marry, you may partly hope that your father
got you not, that you are not the Jew's daughter.

JESSICA  That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so
the sins of my mother should be visited upon me!

LANCELET  Truly, then, I fear you are damned both by
father and mother; thus when I shun Scylla your
father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you
are gone both ways.

JESSICA  I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made
me a Christian.

LANCELET  Truly the more to blame he! We were Christians
enow before, e'en as many as could well live
one by another. This making of Christians will
raise the price of hogs. If we grow all to be pork
eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the
coals for money.

[Enter Lorenzo.]


JESSICA  I'll tell my husband, Lancelet, what you say.
Here he comes.

LORENZO  I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Lancelet,
if you thus get my wife into corners!

JESSICA  Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Lancelet
and I are out. He tells me flatly there's no mercy for
me in heaven because I am a Jew's daughter; and
he says you are no good member of the commonwealth,
for in converting Jews to Christians you
raise the price of pork.

LORENZO  I shall answer that better to the commonwealth
than you can the getting up of the Negro's
belly! The Moor is with child by you, Lancelet.

LANCELET  It is much that the Moor should be more
than reason; but if she be less than an honest
woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

LORENZO  How every fool can play upon the word! I
think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into
silence, and discourse grow commendable in none
only but parrots. Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for
dinner.

LANCELET  That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.

LORENZO  Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you!
Then bid them prepare dinner.

LANCELET  That is done too, sir, only "cover" is the
word.

LORENZO  Will you cover, then, sir?

LANCELET  Not so, sir, neither! I know my duty.

LORENZO  Yet more quarreling with occasion! Wilt
thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an
instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his
plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the
table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to
dinner.

LANCELET  For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for
the meat, sir, it shall be covered; for your coming in
to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humors and conceits
shall govern.	[Lancelet exits.]

LORENZO
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word
Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?

JESSICA
Past all expressing. It is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his lady
He finds the joys of heaven here on Earth,
And if on Earth he do not merit it,
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.

LORENZO  Even such a husband
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

JESSICA
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!

LORENZO
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

JESSICA
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach!

LORENZO
No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.
Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
I shall digest it.

JESSICA  Well, I'll set you forth.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Antonio, Bassanio,
Salerio, and Gratiano, with Attendants.]


DUKE  What, is Antonio here?

ANTONIO  Ready, so please your Grace.

DUKE
I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

ANTONIO  I have heard
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.

DUKE
Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.

SALERIO
He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.

[Enter Shylock.]


DUKE
Make room, and let him stand before our face.--
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, 'tis thought,
Thou 'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touched with humane gentleness and love,
Forgive a moi'ty of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enow to press a royal merchant down
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks, and Tartars never trained
To offices of tender courtesy.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

SHYLOCK
I have possessed your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city's freedom!
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
But say it is my humor. Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig,
Some that are mad if they behold a cat,
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
Cannot contain their urine; for affection
Masters oft passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes. Now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
Why he a harmless necessary cat,
Why he a woolen bagpipe, but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame
As to offend, himself being offended,
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
A losing suit against him. Are you answered?

BASSANIO
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

SHYLOCK
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.

BASSANIO
Do all men kill the things they do not love?

SHYLOCK
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

BASSANIO
Every offence is not a hate at first.

SHYLOCK
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

ANTONIO, [to Bassanio]
I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
You may as well go stand upon the beach
And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
You may as well use question with the wolf
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that than which what's harder?--
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conveniency
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.

BASSANIO
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

SHYLOCK
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them. I would have my bond.

DUKE
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?

SHYLOCK
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
"Let them be free! Marry them to your heirs!
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
Be seasoned with such viands"? You will answer
"The slaves are ours!" So do I answer you:
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought; 'tis mine and I will have it.
If you deny me, fie upon your law:
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
I stand for judgment. Answer: shall I have it?

DUKE
Upon my power I may dismiss this court
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

SALERIO  My lord, here stays without
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
New come from Padua.

DUKE
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.

BASSANIO
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood!

ANTONIO
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meetest for death. The weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
You cannot better be employed, Bassanio,
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.

[Enter Nerissa, disguised as a lawyer's clerk.]


DUKE
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
[Handing him a paper, which he reads, aside, while
Shylock sharpens his knife on the sole of his shoe.]

BASSANIO
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

SHYLOCK
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there.

GRATIANO
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak'st thy knife keen. But no metal can,
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?

SHYLOCK
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

GRATIANO
O, be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accused;
Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infused itself in thee, for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.

SHYLOCK
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.

DUKE
This letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and learned doctor to our court.
Where is he?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  He attendeth here hard by
To know your answer whether you'll admit him.

DUKE
With all my heart.--Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
[Attendants exit.]
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
[He reads.]
Your Grace shall understand that, at the receipt of
your letter, I am very sick, but in the instant that your
messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a
young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthazar. I
acquainted him with the cause in controversy between
the Jew and Antonio the merchant. We turned o'er
many books together. He is furnished with my opinion,
which, bettered with his own learning (the greatness
whereof I cannot enough commend), comes with
him at my importunity to fill up your Grace's request
in my stead. I beseech you let his lack of years be no
impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for I
never knew so young a body with so old a head. I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial
shall better publish his commendation.

You hear the learned Bellario what he writes.

[Enter Portia for Balthazar, disguised as a doctor of
laws, with Attendants.]

And here I take it is the doctor come.--
Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I did, my lord.

DUKE  You are welcome. Take your place.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I am informed throughly of the cause.
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

DUKE
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is your name Shylock?

SHYLOCK  Shylock is my name.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
[To Antonio.] You stand within his danger, do you
not?

ANTONIO
Ay, so he says.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Do you confess the bond?

ANTONIO
I do.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Then must the Jew be merciful.

SHYLOCK
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
The quality of mercy is not strained.
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown.
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptered sway.
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings;
It is an attribute to God Himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God's
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this:
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant
there.

SHYLOCK
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is he not able to discharge the money?

BASSANIO
Yes. Here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. [To the Duke.] And I
beseech you,
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It must not be. There is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;
'Twill be recorded for a precedent
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

SHYLOCK
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel.
O wise young judge, how I do honor thee!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

SHYLOCK
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
[Handing Portia a paper.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.

SHYLOCK
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven!
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant's heart.--Be merciful;
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

SHYLOCK
When it is paid according to the tenor.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
You know the law; your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.

ANTONIO
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, then, thus it is:
You must prepare your bosom for his knife--

SHYLOCK
O noble judge! O excellent young man!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
For the intent and purpose of the law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

SHYLOCK
'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar, to Antonio]
Therefore lay bare your bosom--

SHYLOCK  Ay, his breast!
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
"Nearest his heart." Those are the very words.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is so.
Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

SHYLOCK  I have them ready.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

SHYLOCK
Is it so nominated in the bond?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is not so expressed, but what of that?
'Twere good you do so much for charity.

SHYLOCK
I cannot find it. 'Tis not in the bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You, merchant, have you anything to say?

ANTONIO
But little. I am armed and well prepared.--
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Than is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty, from which ling'ring penance
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Commend me to your honorable wife,
Tell her the process of Antonio's end,
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death,
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I'll pay it instantly with all my heart.

BASSANIO
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
But life itself, my wife, and all the world
Are not with me esteemed above thy life.
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

PORTIA, [aside]
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

GRATIANO
I have a wife who I protest I love.
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

NERISSA, [aside]
'Tis well you offer it behind her back.
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

SHYLOCK
These be the Christian husbands! I have a
daughter--
Would any of the stock of Barabbas
Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!
We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine:
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.

SHYLOCK  Most rightful judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:
The law allows it, and the court awards it.

SHYLOCK
Most learned judge! A sentence!--Come, prepare.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Tarry a little. There is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh."
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

GRATIANO
O upright judge!--Mark, Jew.--O learned judge!

SHYLOCK
Is that the law?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Thyself shalt see the act.
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir'st.

GRATIANO
O learned judge!--Mark, Jew, a learned judge!

SHYLOCK
I take this offer then. Pay the bond thrice
And let the Christian go.

BASSANIO  Here is the money.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste!
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

GRATIANO
O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak'st more
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple--nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

GRATIANO
A second Daniel! A Daniel, Jew!
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

SHYLOCK
Give me my principal and let me go.

BASSANIO
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He hath refused it in the open court.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

GRATIANO
A Daniel still, say I! A second Daniel!--
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

SHYLOCK
Shall I not have barely my principal?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

SHYLOCK
Why, then, the devil give him good of it!
I'll stay no longer question.	[He begins to exit.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Tarry, Jew.
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou stand'st,
For it appears by manifest proceeding
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred
The danger formerly by me rehearsed.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

GRATIANO
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself!
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
Therefore thou must be hanged at the state's
charge.

DUKE
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.

SHYLOCK
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that.
You take my house when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?

GRATIANO
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God's sake!

ANTONIO
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more: that for this favor
He presently become a Christian;
The other, that he do record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

DUKE
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

SHYLOCK
I am content.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

SHYLOCK
I pray you give me leave to go from hence.
I am not well. Send the deed after me
And I will sign it.

DUKE  Get thee gone, but do it.

GRATIANO
In christ'ning shalt thou have two godfathers.
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
[Shylock exits.]

DUKE, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon.
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is meet I presently set forth.

DUKE
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.--
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.
[The Duke and his train exit.]

BASSANIO, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

ANTONIO
And stand indebted, over and above,
In love and service to you evermore.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I, delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account myself well paid.
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
I pray you know me when we meet again.
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
[She begins to exit.]

BASSANIO
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you:
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
Give me your gloves; I'll wear them for your sake--
And for your love I'll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

BASSANIO
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle.
I will not shame myself to give you this.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I will have nothing else but only this.
And now methinks I have a mind to it.

BASSANIO
There's more depends on this than on the value.
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation.
Only for this, I pray you pardon me.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.

BASSANIO
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
And if your wife be not a madwoman,
And know how well I have deserved this ring,
She would not hold out enemy forever
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.
[Portia and Nerissa exit.]

ANTONIO
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.

BASSANIO
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst
Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste.
[Gratiano exits.]
Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont.--Come, Antonio.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia and Nerissa, still in disguise.]


PORTIA
Inquire the Jew's house out; give him this deed
And let him sign it. [She gives Nerissa a paper.] We'll
away tonight,
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.	[He gives her a ring.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  That cannot be.
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house.

GRATIANO
That will I do.

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  Sir, I would speak with you.
[Aside to Portia.] I'll see if I can get my husband's
ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep forever.

PORTIA, [aside to Nerissa]
Thou mayst, I warrant! We shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we'll outface them, and outswear them, too.--
Away, make haste! Thou know'st where I will tarry.
[She exits.]

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Lorenzo and Jessica.]


LORENZO
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
And they did make no noise, in such a night
Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself
And ran dismayed away.

LORENZO  In such a night
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
To come again to Carthage.

JESSICA  In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Aeson.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

JESSICA
I would out-night you did nobody come,
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

[Enter Stephano, a Messenger.]


LORENZO
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

STEPHANO  A friend.

LORENZO
A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you,
friend.

STEPHANO
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LORENZO  Who comes with her?

STEPHANO
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you, is my master yet returned?

LORENZO
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.--
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

[Enter Lancelet, the Clown.]


LANCELET  Sola, sola! Wo ha, ho! Sola, sola!

LORENZO  Who calls?

LANCELET  Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master
Lorenzo, sola, sola!

LORENZO  Leave holloaing, man! Here.

LANCELET  Sola! Where, where?

LORENZO  Here!

LANCELET  Tell him there's a post come from my master
with his horn full of good news. My master will
be here ere morning, sweet soul.	[Lancelet exits.]

LORENZO, [to Jessica]
Let's in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter; why should we go in?--
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
[Stephano exits.]
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins.
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

[Enter Stephano and musicians.]

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear,
And draw her home with music.
[Music plays.]

JESSICA
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

LORENZO
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze
By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and
floods,
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

[Enter Portia and Nerissa.]


PORTIA
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

NERISSA
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.

PORTIA
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a king
Until a king be by, and then his state
Empties itself as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Music, hark!

NERISSA
It is your music, madam, of the house.

PORTIA
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

NERISSA
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.

PORTIA
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended, and I think
The nightingale, if she should sing by day
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season seasoned are
To their right praise and true perfection!
Peace--how the moon sleeps with Endymion
And would not be awaked!
[Music ceases.]

LORENZO  That is the voice,
Or I am much deceived, of Portia.

PORTIA
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
By the bad voice.

LORENZO  Dear lady, welcome home.

PORTIA
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
Which speed we hope the better for our words.
Are they returned?

LORENZO  Madam, they are not yet,
But there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.

PORTIA  Go in, Nerissa.
Give order to my servants that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence--
Nor you, Lorenzo--Jessica, nor you.
[A trumpet sounds.]

LORENZO
Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

PORTIA
This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
It looks a little paler. 'Tis a day
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

[Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano, and their followers.]


BASSANIO
We should hold day with the Antipodes
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

PORTIA
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
[Gratiano and Nerissa talk aside.]

BASSANIO
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

PORTIA
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.

ANTONIO
No more than I am well acquitted of.

PORTIA
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words;
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

GRATIANO, [to Nerissa]
By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong!
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.

PORTIA
A quarrel ho, already! What's the matter?

GRATIANO
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
For all the world like cutler's poetry
Upon a knife, "Love me, and leave me not."

NERISSA
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it.

GRATIANO
He will, an if he live to be a man.

NERISSA
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.

GRATIANO
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk,
A prating boy that begged it as a fee.
I could not for my heart deny it him.

PORTIA
You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
An 'twere to me I should be mad at it.

BASSANIO, [aside]
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
And swear I lost the ring defending it.

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begged it, and indeed
Deserved it, too. And then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine,
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.

PORTIA  What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.

BASSANIO
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it, but you see my finger
Hath not the ring upon it. It is gone.

PORTIA
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
Until I see the ring!

NERISSA, [to Gratiano]  Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine!

BASSANIO  Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When naught would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

PORTIA
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honor to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
I'll die for 't but some woman had the ring!

BASSANIO
No, by my honor, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
And begged the ring, the which I did deny him
And suffered him to go displeased away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforced to send it after him.
I was beset with shame and courtesy.
My honor would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady,
For by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begged
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

PORTIA
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house!
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you:
I'll not deny him anything I have,
No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus.
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,
I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow.

NERISSA
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

GRATIANO
Well, do you so. Let not me take him, then,
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.

ANTONIO
I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.

PORTIA
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome
notwithstanding.

BASSANIO
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see myself--

PORTIA  Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
In each eye one. Swear by your double self,
And there's an oath of credit.

BASSANIO  Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

ANTONIO
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
Which but for him that had your husband's ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

PORTIA
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
[Giving Antonio a ring.]
And bid him keep it better than the other.

ANTONIO
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

BASSANIO
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

PORTIA
I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

NERISSA
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
[She shows a ring.]

GRATIANO
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough!
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?

PORTIA
Speak not so grossly.--You are all amazed.
[She hands a paper to Bassanio.]
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now returned. I have not yet
Entered my house.--Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon.
[Handing him a paper.]
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbor suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

ANTONIO  I am dumb.

BASSANIO
Were you the doctor and I knew you not?

GRATIANO
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?

NERISSA
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

BASSANIO, [to Portia]
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

ANTONIO
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.

PORTIA  How now, Lorenzo?
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

NERISSA
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
[Handing him a paper.]
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.

LORENZO
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.

PORTIA  It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

GRATIANO
Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is
Whether till the next night she had rather stay
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
[They exit.]

A Midsummer Night's Dream
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/a-midsummer-nights-dream/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
Four lovers:
  HERMIA
  LYSANDER
  HELENA
  DEMETRIUS
THESEUS, duke of Athens
HIPPOLYTA, queen of the Amazons
EGEUS, father to Hermia
PHILOSTRATE, master of the revels to Theseus
NICK BOTTOM, weaver
PETER QUINCE, carpenter
FRANCIS FLUTE, bellows-mender
TOM SNOUT, tinker
SNUG, joiner
ROBIN STARVELING, tailor
OBERON, king of the Fairies
TITANIA, queen of the Fairies
ROBIN GOODFELLOW, a "puck," or hobgoblin, in Oberon's service
A FAIRY, in the service of Titania
Fairies attending upon Titania:
  PEASEBLOSSOM
  COBWEB
  MOTE
  MUSTARDSEED
Lords and Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta
Other Fairies in the trains of Titania and Oberon


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, with others.]


THESEUS
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in
Another moon. But, O, methinks how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires
Like to a stepdame or a dowager
Long withering out a young man's revenue.

HIPPOLYTA
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.

THESEUS  Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
[Philostrate exits.]
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword
And won thy love doing thee injuries,
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.

[Enter Egeus and his daughter Hermia, and Lysander 
 and Demetrius.]


EGEUS
Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!

THESEUS
Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?

EGEUS
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.--
Stand forth, Demetrius.--My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.--
Stand forth, Lysander.--And, my gracious duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.--
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes
And interchanged love tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung
With feigning voice verses of feigning love
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats--messengers
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth.
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart,
Turned her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness.--And, my gracious duke,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine, I may dispose of her,
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.

THESEUS
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid.
To you, your father should be as a god,
One that composed your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

HERMIA
So is Lysander.

THESEUS  In himself he is,
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
The other must be held the worthier.

HERMIA
I would my father looked but with my eyes.

THESEUS
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

HERMIA
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

THESEUS
Either to die the death or to abjure
Forever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether (if you yield not to your father's choice)
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.

HERMIA
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his Lordship whose unwished yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

THESEUS
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon
(The sealing day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship),
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father's will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana's altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.

DEMETRIUS
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right.

LYSANDER
You have her father's love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia's. Do you marry him.

EGEUS
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.

LYSANDER, [to Theseus]
I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
As well possessed. My love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius';
And (which is more than all these boasts can be)
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.

THESEUS
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being overfull of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.--But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.--
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father's will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death or to a vow of single life.--
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?--
Demetrius and Egeus, go along.
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

EGEUS
With duty and desire we follow you.
[All but Hermia and Lysander exit.]

LYSANDER
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?

HERMIA
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

LYSANDER
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood--

HERMIA
O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.

LYSANDER
Or else misgraffed in respect of years--

HERMIA
O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.

LYSANDER
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends--

HERMIA
O hell, to choose love by another's eyes!

LYSANDER
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say "Behold!"
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.
So quick bright things come to confusion.

HERMIA
If then true lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.

LYSANDER
A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia:
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night,
And in the wood a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.

HERMIA  My good Lysander,
I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.

LYSANDER
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

[Enter Helena.]


HERMIA
Godspeed, fair Helena. Whither away?

HELENA
Call you me "fair"? That "fair" again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lodestars and your tongue's sweet air
More tunable than lark to shepherd's ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O, were favor so!
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye;
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet
melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!

HERMIA
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

HELENA
O, that your frowns would teach my smiles such
skill!

HERMIA
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

HELENA
O, that my prayers could such affection move!

HERMIA
The more I hate, the more he follows me.

HELENA
The more I love, the more he hateth me.

HERMIA
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.

HELENA
None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!

HERMIA
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!

LYSANDER
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.

HERMIA
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.--
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.

LYSANDER
I will, my Hermia.	[Hermia exits.]
Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
[Lysander exits.]

HELENA
How happy some o'er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but he do know.
And, as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind;
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is Love said to be a child
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjured everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and show'rs of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her. And, for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.
[She exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Quince the carpenter, and Snug the joiner, and
Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender, and
Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor.]


QUINCE  Is all our company here?

BOTTOM  You were best to call them generally, man by
man, according to the scrip.

QUINCE  Here is the scroll of every man's name which
is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our
interlude before the Duke and the Duchess on his
wedding day at night.

BOTTOM  First, good Peter Quince, say what the play
treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so
grow to a point.

QUINCE  Marry, our play is "The most lamentable
comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and
Thisbe."

BOTTOM  A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a
merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your
actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.

QUINCE  Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

BOTTOM  Ready. Name what part I am for, and
proceed.

QUINCE  You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

BOTTOM  What is Pyramus--a lover or a tyrant?

QUINCE  A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.

BOTTOM  That will ask some tears in the true performing
of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their
eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in some
measure. To the rest.--Yet my chief humor is for a
tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a
cat in, to make all split:

	The raging rocks
	And shivering shocks
	Shall break the locks
	   Of prison gates.
	And Phibbus' car
	Shall shine from far
	And make and mar
	   The foolish Fates.

This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players.
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein. A lover is more
condoling.

QUINCE  Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

FLUTE  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.

FLUTE  What is Thisbe--a wand'ring knight?

QUINCE  It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

FLUTE  Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a
beard coming.

QUINCE  That's all one. You shall play it in a mask, and
you may speak as small as you will.

BOTTOM  An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too.
I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: "Thisne,
Thisne!"--"Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy Thisbe
dear and lady dear!"

QUINCE  No, no, you must play Pyramus--and, Flute,
you Thisbe.

BOTTOM  Well, proceed.

QUINCE  Robin Starveling, the tailor.

STARVELING  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe's
mother.--Tom Snout, the tinker.

SNOUT  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  You, Pyramus' father.--Myself, Thisbe's
father.--Snug the joiner, you the lion's part.--
And I hope here is a play fitted.

SNUG  Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it
be, give it me, for I am slow of study.

QUINCE  You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but
roaring.

BOTTOM  Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will
do any man's heart good to hear me. I will roar that
I will make the Duke say "Let him roar again. Let
him roar again!"

QUINCE  An you should do it too terribly, you would
fright the Duchess and the ladies that they would
shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.

ALL  That would hang us, every mother's son.

BOTTOM  I grant you, friends, if you should fright the
ladies out of their wits, they would have no more
discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove. I will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.

QUINCE  You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus
is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one
shall see in a summer's day, a most lovely gentlemanlike
man. Therefore you must needs play 
Pyramus.

BOTTOM  Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I
best to play it in?

QUINCE  Why, what you will.

BOTTOM  I will discharge it in either your straw-color
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain
beard, or your French-crown-color beard,
your perfit yellow.

QUINCE  Some of your French crowns have no hair at
all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters,
here are your parts, [giving out the parts,] and I am
to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con
them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace
wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There
will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall
be dogged with company and our devices known. In
the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as
our play wants. I pray you fail me not.

BOTTOM  We will meet, and there we may rehearse
most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be
perfit. Adieu.

QUINCE  At the Duke's Oak we meet.

BOTTOM  Enough. Hold or cut bowstrings.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a Fairy at one door and Robin Goodfellow at
another.]


ROBIN
How now, spirit? Whither wander you?

FAIRY
	Over hill, over dale,
	   Thorough bush, thorough brier,
	Over park, over pale,
	   Thorough flood, thorough fire;
	I do wander everywhere,
	Swifter than the moon's sphere.
	And I serve the Fairy Queen,
	To dew her orbs upon the green.
	The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
	In their gold coats spots you see;
	Those be rubies, fairy favors;
	In those freckles live their savors.
I must go seek some dewdrops here
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I'll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves come here anon.

ROBIN
The King doth keep his revels here tonight.
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild.
But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her
joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.

FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that "Hobgoblin" call you and "sweet Puck,"
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?

ROBIN  Thou speakest aright.
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon and make him smile
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal.
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she
And "Tailor!" cries and falls into a cough,
And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.

FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

[Enter Oberon the King of Fairies at one door, with his
train, and Titania the Queen at another, with hers.]


OBERON
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

TITANIA
What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed and company.

OBERON
Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?

TITANIA
Then I must be thy lady. But I know
When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskined mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?

OBERON
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering
night
From Perigouna, whom he ravished,
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?

TITANIA
These are the forgeries of jealousy;
And never, since the middle summer's spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By paved fountain or by rushy brook,
Or in the beached margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge have sucked up from the sea
Contagious fogs, which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The plowman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
And crows are fatted with the murrain flock.
The nine-men's-morris is filled up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blessed.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world
By their increase now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.

OBERON
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.

TITANIA  Set your heart at rest:
The Fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot'ress of my order,
And in the spiced Indian air by night
Full often hath she gossiped by my side
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
Marking th' embarked traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait,
Following (her womb then rich with my young
squire),
Would imitate and sail upon the land
To fetch me trifles and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.

OBERON
How long within this wood intend you stay?

TITANIA
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our round
And see our moonlight revels, go with us.
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

OBERON
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.

TITANIA
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
[Titania and her fairies exit.]

OBERON
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.--
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid's music.

ROBIN  I remember.

OBERON
That very time I saw (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the Earth,
Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took
At a fair vestal throned by the west,
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon,
And the imperial vot'ress passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before, milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
And maidens call it "love-in-idleness."
Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed thee once.
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

ROBIN
I'll put a girdle round about the Earth
In forty minutes.	[He exits.]

OBERON  Having once this juice,
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
The next thing then she, waking, looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb),
I'll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will overhear their conference.

[Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.]


DEMETRIUS
I love thee not; therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I'll stay; the other stayeth me.
Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
And here am I, and wood within this wood
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.

HELENA
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant!
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.

DEMETRIUS
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?

HELENA
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel: spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave
(Unworthy as I am) to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be used as you use your dog?

DEMETRIUS
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.

HELENA
And I am sick when I look not on you.

DEMETRIUS
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place
With the rich worth of your virginity.

HELENA
Your virtue is my privilege. For that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night.
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then, how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?

DEMETRIUS
I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

HELENA
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will. The story shall be changed:
Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed
When cowardice pursues and valor flies!

DEMETRIUS
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

HELENA
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be wooed and were not made to woo.
[Demetrius exits.]
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell
To die upon the hand I love so well.	[Helena exits.]

OBERON
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

[Enter Robin.]

Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

ROBIN
Ay, there it is.

OBERON  I pray thee give it me.
[Robin gives him the flower.]
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet muskroses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight.
And there the snake throws her enameled skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove.
[He gives Robin part of the flower.]
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes,
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love.
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

ROBIN
Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Titania, Queen of Fairies, with her train.]


TITANIA
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence--
Some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds,
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep.
Then to your offices and let me rest.	[She lies down.]

[Fairies sing.]


FIRST FAIRY
	You spotted snakes with double tongue,
	   Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen.
	Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,
	   Come not near our Fairy Queen.

CHORUS
	   Philomel, with melody
	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
	   Never harm
	   Nor spell nor charm
	Come our lovely lady nigh.
	So good night, with lullaby.

FIRST FAIRY
	Weaving spiders, come not here.
	   Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence.
	Beetles black, approach not near.
	   Worm nor snail, do no offence.

CHORUS
	   Philomel, with melody
	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
	   Never harm
	   Nor spell nor charm
	Come our lovely lady nigh.
	So good night, with lullaby.
[Titania sleeps.]

SECOND FAIRY
Hence, away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.	[ Fairies exit.]

[Enter Oberon, who anoints Titania's eyelids with the
nectar.]


OBERON
	What thou seest when thou dost wake
	Do it for thy true love take.
	Love and languish for his sake.
	Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
	Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
	In thy eye that shall appear
	When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.
	Wake when some vile thing is near.	[He exits.]

[Enter Lysander and Hermia.]


LYSANDER
Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood.
   And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
   And tarry for the comfort of the day.

HERMIA
Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.

LYSANDER
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.

HERMIA
Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.

LYSANDER
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it;
Two bosoms interchained with an oath--
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

HERMIA
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy,
Lie further off in human modesty.
Such separation, as may well be said,
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid.
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!

LYSANDER
"Amen, amen" to that fair prayer, say I,
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!

HERMIA
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
[They sleep.]

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN
	Through the forest have I gone,
	But Athenian found I none
	On whose eyes I might approve
	This flower's force in stirring love.
[He sees Lysander.]
	Night and silence! Who is here?
	Weeds of Athens he doth wear.
	This is he my master said
	Despised the Athenian maid.
	And here the maiden, sleeping sound
	On the dank and dirty ground.
	Pretty soul, she durst not lie
	Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.--
	Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
	All the power this charm doth owe.
[He anoints Lysander's eyelids
with the nectar.]
	When thou wak'st, let love forbid
	Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
	So, awake when I am gone,
	For I must now to Oberon.	[He exits.]

[Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.]


HELENA
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

HELENA
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.

DEMETRIUS
Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.	[Demetrius exits.]

HELENA
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase.
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear.
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do as a monster fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.--
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.

LYSANDER, [waking up]
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

HELENA
Do not say so. Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what
though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.

LYSANDER
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason.
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook
Love's stories written in love's richest book.

HELENA
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is 't not enough, is 't not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well. Perforce I must confess
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refused
Should of another therefore be abused!	[She exits.]

LYSANDER
She sees not Hermia.--Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near.
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honor Helen and to be her knight.	[He exits.]

HERMIA, [waking up]
Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander, lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.--
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I'll find immediately.
[She exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[With Titania still asleep onstage, enter the Clowns,
Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug, and Flute.]


BOTTOM  Are we all met?

QUINCE  Pat, pat. And here's a marvels convenient
place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be
our stage, this hawthorn brake our tiring-house,
and we will do it in action as we will do it before
the Duke.

BOTTOM  Peter Quince?

QUINCE  What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

BOTTOM  There are things in this comedy of Pyramus
and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus
must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies
cannot abide. How answer you that?

SNOUT  By 'r lakin, a parlous fear.

STARVELING  I believe we must leave the killing out,
when all is done.

BOTTOM  Not a whit! I have a device to make all well.
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to
say we will do no harm with our swords and that
Pyramus is not killed indeed. And, for the more
better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not
Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them
out of fear.

QUINCE  Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall
be written in eight and six.

BOTTOM  No, make it two more. Let it be written in
eight and eight.

SNOUT  Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

STARVELING  I fear it, I promise you.

BOTTOM  Masters, you ought to consider with yourself,
to bring in (God shield us!) a lion among ladies is a
most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful
wildfowl than your lion living, and we ought to look
to 't.

SNOUT  Therefore another prologue must tell he is not
a lion.

BOTTOM  Nay, you must name his name, and half his
face must be seen through the lion's neck, and he
himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: "Ladies," or "Fair ladies, I would
wish you," or "I would request you," or "I would
entreat you not to fear, not to tremble! My life for
yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it were
pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as
other men are." And there indeed let him name his
name and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.

QUINCE  Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard
things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber,
for you know Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.

SNOUT  Doth the moon shine that night we play our
play?

BOTTOM  A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac.
Find out moonshine, find out moonshine.
[Quince takes out a book.]

QUINCE  Yes, it doth shine that night.

BOTTOM  Why, then, may you leave a casement of the
great chamber window, where we play, open, and
the moon may shine in at the casement.

QUINCE  Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of
thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure
or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there
is another thing: we must have a wall in the great
chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story,
did talk through the chink of a wall.

SNOUT  You can never bring in a wall. What say you,
Bottom?

BOTTOM  Some man or other must present Wall. And
let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some
roughcast about him to signify wall, or let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall
Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.

QUINCE  If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down,
every mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus,
you begin. When you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake, and so everyone
according to his cue.

[Enter Robin invisible to those onstage.]


ROBIN, [aside]
What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I'll be an auditor--
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.

QUINCE  Speak, Pyramus.--Thisbe, stand forth.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
	Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet--

QUINCE  Odors, odors!

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
		...odors savors sweet.
	So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.--
	But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
	And by and by I will to thee appear.	[He exits.]

ROBIN, [aside]
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.	[He exits.]

FLUTE  Must I speak now?

QUINCE  Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand
he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to
come again.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
	Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
	Of color like the red rose on triumphant brier,
	Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
	As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.
	I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.

QUINCE  "Ninus' tomb," man! Why, you must not
speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You
speak all your part at once, cues and all.--Pyramus,
enter. Your cue is past. It is "never tire."

FLUTE  O!
[As Thisbe.] As true as truest horse, that yet would never
tire.

[Enter Robin, and Bottom as Pyramus with the
ass-head.]


BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
	If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine.

QUINCE  O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray,
masters, fly, masters! Help!
[Quince, Flute, Snout, Snug, and Starveling exit.]

ROBIN
I'll follow you. I'll lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake,
   through brier.
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,
And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
[He exits.]

BOTTOM  Why do they run away? This is a knavery of
them to make me afeard.

[Enter Snout.]


SNOUT  O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on
thee?

BOTTOM  What do you see? You see an ass-head of your
own, do you?	[Snout exits.]

[Enter Quince.]


QUINCE  Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art
translated!	[He exits.]

BOTTOM  I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of
me, to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir
from this place, do what they can. I will walk up
and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear
I am not afraid.
[He sings.]	The ouzel cock, so black of hue,
	   With orange-tawny bill,
	The throstle with his note so true,
	   The wren with little quill--

TITANIA, [waking up]
What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?

BOTTOM [sings]
	The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
	   The plainsong cuckoo gray,
	Whose note full many a man doth mark
	   And dares not answer "nay"--
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a
bird? Who would give a bird the lie though he cry
"cuckoo" never so?

TITANIA
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note,
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,
And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.

BOTTOM  Methinks, mistress, you should have little
reason for that. And yet, to say the truth, reason
and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbors will
not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
occasion.

TITANIA
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

BOTTOM  Not so neither; but if I had wit enough to get
out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own
turn.

TITANIA
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state,
And I do love thee. Therefore go with me.
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.--
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed!

[Enter four Fairies: Peaseblossom, Cobweb,
Mote, and Mustardseed.]


PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.

COBWEB  And I.

MOTE  And I.

MUSTARDSEED  And I.

ALL  Where shall we go?

TITANIA
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
And light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.

PEASEBLOSSOM  Hail, mortal!

COBWEB  Hail!

MOTE  Hail!

MUSTARDSEED  Hail!

BOTTOM  I cry your Worships mercy, heartily.--I beseech
your Worship's name.

COBWEB  Cobweb.

BOTTOM  I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good
Master Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make
bold with you.--Your name, honest gentleman?

PEASEBLOSSOM  Peaseblossom.

BOTTOM  I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash,
your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father.
Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.--Your name, I beseech
you, sir?

MUSTARDSEED  Mustardseed.

BOTTOM  Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience
well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef
hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes
water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance,
good Master Mustardseed.

TITANIA
Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a wat'ry eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my lover's tongue. Bring him silently.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Oberon, King of Fairies.]


OBERON
I wonder if Titania be awaked;
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]

Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?

ROBIN
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and entered in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass's noll I fixed on his head.
Anon his Thisbe must be answered,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls.
He "Murder" cries and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus
strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things
catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.

OBERON
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?

ROBIN
I took him sleeping--that is finished, too--
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.

[Enter Demetrius and Hermia.]


OBERON
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.

ROBIN
This is the woman, but not this the man.
[They step aside.]

DEMETRIUS
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe!

HERMIA
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stolen away
From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon
May through the center creep and so displease
Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

DEMETRIUS
So should the murdered look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

HERMIA
What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?

DEMETRIUS
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

HERMIA
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
O, once tell true! Tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have looked upon him, being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it, for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

DEMETRIUS
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood,
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

HERMIA
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

DEMETRIUS
An if I could, what should I get therefor?

HERMIA
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
[She exits.]

DEMETRIUS
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrout sleep doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
[He lies down and falls asleep.]

OBERON, [to Robin]
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite
And laid the love juice on some true-love's sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true-love turned, and not a false turned true.

ROBIN
Then fate o'errules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

OBERON
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer
With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here.
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.

ROBIN  I go, I go, look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.	[He exits.]

OBERON, [applying the nectar to Demetrius' eyes]
	Flower of this purple dye,
	Hit with Cupid's archery,
	Sink in apple of his eye.
	When his love he doth espy,
	Let her shine as gloriously
	As the Venus of the sky.--
	When thou wak'st, if she be by,
	Beg of her for remedy.

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN
	Captain of our fairy band,
	Helena is here at hand,
	And the youth, mistook by me,
	Pleading for a lover's fee.
	Shall we their fond pageant see?
	Lord, what fools these mortals be!

OBERON
	Stand aside. The noise they make
	Will cause Demetrius to awake.

ROBIN
	Then will two at once woo one.
	That must needs be sport alone.
	And those things do best please me
	That befall prepost'rously.
[They step aside.]

[Enter Lysander and Helena.]


LYSANDER
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
   Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
   In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?

HELENA
You do advance your cunning more and more.
   When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray!
These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?
   Weigh oath with oath and you will nothing
   weigh.
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.

LYSANDER
I had no judgment when to her I swore.

HELENA
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.

LYSANDER
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

DEMETRIUS, [waking up]
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!

HELENA
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so,
To vow and swear and superpraise my parts,
When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals and love Hermia,
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin and extort
A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.

LYSANDER
You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here with all goodwill, with all my heart,
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.

HELENA
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.

DEMETRIUS
Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none.
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned,
And now to Helen is it home returned,
There to remain.

LYSANDER  Helen, it is not so.

DEMETRIUS
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.

[Enter Hermia.]


HERMIA, [to Lysander]
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

LYSANDER
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?

HERMIA
What love could press Lysander from my side?

LYSANDER
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee
know
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?

HERMIA
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.

HELENA
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.--
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us--O, is all forgot?
All schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been incorporate. So we grew together
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet an union in partition,
Two lovely berries molded on one stem;
So with two seeming bodies but one heart,
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly; 'tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.

HERMIA
I am amazed at your words.
I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.

HELENA
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face,
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unloved?
This you should pity rather than despise.

HERMIA
I understand not what you mean by this.

HELENA
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare you well. 'Tis partly my own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.

LYSANDER
Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.

HELENA
O excellent!

HERMIA, [to Lysander]
Sweet, do not scorn her so.

DEMETRIUS, [to Lysander]
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.

LYSANDER
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak
prayers.--
Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do.
I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
To prove him false that says I love thee not.

DEMETRIUS
I say I love thee more than he can do.

LYSANDER
If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.

DEMETRIUS
Quick, come.

HERMIA  Lysander, whereto tends all this?
[She takes hold of Lysander.]

LYSANDER
Away, you Ethiop!

DEMETRIUS, [to Hermia]
No, no. He'll
Seem to break loose. [To Lysander.] Take on as you
would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!

LYSANDER, [to Hermia]
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

HERMIA
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?

LYSANDER  Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathed med'cine! O, hated potion, hence!

HERMIA
Do you not jest?

HELENA  Yes, sooth, and so do you.

LYSANDER
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

DEMETRIUS
I would I had your bond. For I perceive
A weak bond holds you. I'll not trust your word.

LYSANDER
What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.

HERMIA
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left
me.
Why, then, you left me--O, the gods forbid!--
In earnest, shall I say?

LYSANDER  Ay, by my life,
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
[Hermia turns him loose.]

HERMIA
O me! [To Helena.] You juggler, you cankerblossom,
You thief of love! What, have you come by night
And stol'n my love's heart from him?

HELENA  Fine, i' faith.
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!

HERMIA
"Puppet"? Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

HELENA
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness.
I am a right maid for my cowardice.
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.

HERMIA  "Lower"? Hark, again!

HELENA
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you--
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He followed you; for love, I followed him.
But he hath chid me hence and threatened me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple and how fond I am.

HERMIA
Why, get you gone. Who is 't that hinders you?

HELENA
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.

HERMIA
What, with Lysander?

HELENA  With Demetrius.

LYSANDER
Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.

DEMETRIUS
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

HELENA
O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.

HERMIA
"Little" again? Nothing but "low" and "little"?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.

LYSANDER  Get you gone, you dwarf,
You minimus of hind'ring knotgrass made,
You bead, you acorn--

DEMETRIUS  You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.

LYSANDER  Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

DEMETRIUS
"Follow"? Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
[Demetrius and Lysander exit.]

HERMIA
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
[Helena retreats.]
Nay, go not back.

HELENA  I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.	[She exits.]

HERMIA
I am amazed and know not what to say.	[She exits.]

OBERON, [to Robin]
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,
Or else committ'st thy knaveries willfully.

ROBIN
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

OBERON
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie, therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another's way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue;
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,
[He gives a flower to Robin.]
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision.
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmed eye release
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.

ROBIN
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wand'ring here and
there
Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all,
That in crossways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They willfully themselves exile from light
And must for aye consort with black-browed night.

OBERON
But we are spirits of another sort.
I with the Morning's love have oft made sport
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But notwithstanding, haste! Make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.	[He exits.]

ROBIN
	Up and down, up and down,
	I will lead them up and down.
	I am feared in field and town.
	Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.

[Enter Lysander.]


LYSANDER
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.

ROBIN, [in Demetrius' voice]
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?

LYSANDER  I will be with thee straight.

ROBIN, [in Demetrius' voice]  Follow me, then, to
plainer ground.	[Lysander exits.]

[Enter Demetrius.]


DEMETRIUS  Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy
head?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come, thou
child!
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled
That draws a sword on thee.

DEMETRIUS  Yea, art thou there?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Follow my voice. We'll try no manhood here.
[They exit.]

[Enter Lysander.]


LYSANDER
He goes before me and still dares me on.
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day,
For if but once thou show me thy gray light,
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.
[He lies down and sleeps.]

[Enter Robin and Demetrius.]


ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?

DEMETRIUS
Abide me, if thou dar'st, for well I wot
Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,
And dar'st not stand nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Come hither. I am here.

DEMETRIUS
Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this
dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see.
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day's approach look to be visited.
[He lies down and sleeps.]

[Enter Helena.]


HELENA
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
   Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight
   From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
[She lies down and sleeps.]

ROBIN
	Yet but three? Come one more.
	Two of both kinds makes up four.
	Here she comes, curst and sad.
	Cupid is a knavish lad
	Thus to make poor females mad.

[Enter Hermia.]


HERMIA
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go.
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray!
[She lies down and sleeps.]

ROBIN
	   On the ground
	   Sleep sound.
	   I'll apply
	   To your eye,
	Gentle lover, remedy.

[Robin applies the nectar 
 to Lysander's eyes.]
	   When thou wak'st,
	   Thou tak'st
	   True delight
	   In the sight
	Of thy former lady's eye.
	And the country proverb known,
	That every man should take his own,
	In your waking shall be shown.
	   Jack shall have Jill;
	   Naught shall go ill;
	The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be
well.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[With the four lovers still asleep onstage, enter
Titania, Queen of Fairies, and Bottom and Fairies,
and Oberon, the King, behind them unseen by those
onstage.]


TITANIA
Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick muskroses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

BOTTOM  Where's Peaseblossom?

PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.

BOTTOM  Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where's
Monsieur Cobweb?

COBWEB  Ready.

BOTTOM  Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you
your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped
humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
yourself too much in the action, monsieur, and,
good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a
honey-bag, signior. [Cobweb exits.] Where's Monsieur
Mustardseed?

MUSTARDSEED  Ready.

BOTTOM  Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed.
Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.

MUSTARDSEED  What's your will?

BOTTOM  Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery
Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber's,
monsieur, for methinks I am marvels hairy about
the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do
but tickle me, I must scratch.

TITANIA
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?

BOTTOM  I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's
have the tongs and the bones.

TITANIA
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.

BOTTOM  Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch
your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire
to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.

TITANIA
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts.

BOTTOM  I had rather have a handful or two of dried
peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir
me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.

TITANIA
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.--
Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.
[Fairies exit.]
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist; the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
[Bottom and Titania sleep.]

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]


OBERON
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her.
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets' eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child,
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he, awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair
And think no more of this night's accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
[He applies the nectar to her eyes.]
	Be as thou wast wont to be.
	See as thou wast wont to see.
	Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
	Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.

TITANIA, [waking]
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamored of an ass.

OBERON
There lies your love.

TITANIA  How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!

OBERON
Silence awhile.--Robin, take off this head.--
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.

TITANIA
Music, ho, music such as charmeth sleep!

ROBIN, [removing the ass-head from Bottom]
Now, when thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes
peep.

OBERON
Sound music.	[Music.]
Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
[Titania and Oberon dance.]
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity.
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.

ROBIN
	Fairy king, attend and mark.
	I do hear the morning lark.

OBERON
	Then, my queen, in silence sad
	Trip we after night's shade.
	We the globe can compass soon,
	Swifter than the wand'ring moon.

TITANIA
	Come, my lord, and in our flight
	Tell me how it came this night
	That I sleeping here was found
	With these mortals on the ground.
[Oberon, Robin, and Titania exit.]

[Wind horn. Enter Theseus and all his train,
Hippolyta, Egeus.]


THESEUS
Go, one of you, find out the Forester.
For now our observation is performed,
And, since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch, I say, and find the Forester.
[A Servant exits.]
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

HIPPOLYTA
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

THESEUS
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tunable
Was never holloed to, nor cheered with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.--But soft! What nymphs are
these?

EGEUS
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is,
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.
I wonder of their being here together.

THESEUS
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

EGEUS  It is, my lord.

THESEUS
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
[A Servant exits.]
[Shout within. Wind horns. They all start up.]

THESEUS
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
[Demetrius, Helena, Hermia, and Lysander kneel.]

LYSANDER
Pardon, my lord.

THESEUS  I pray you all, stand up.
[They rise.]
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?

LYSANDER
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think--for truly would I speak,
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
Without the peril of the Athenian law--

EGEUS
Enough, enough!--My lord, you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stol'n away.--They would,
Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.

DEMETRIUS
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon,
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will forevermore be true to it.

THESEUS
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.--
Egeus, I will overbear your will,
For in the temple by and by, with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.--
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.
[Theseus and his train,
including Hippolyta and Egeus, exit.]

DEMETRIUS
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.

HERMIA
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.

HELENA  So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own and not mine own.

DEMETRIUS  Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here and bid us follow him?

HERMIA
Yea, and my father.

HELENA  And Hippolyta.

LYSANDER
And he did bid us follow to the temple.

DEMETRIUS
Why, then, we are awake. Let's follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.
[Lovers exit.]

BOTTOM, [waking up]   When my cue comes, call me,
and I will answer. My next is "Most fair Pyramus."
Hey-ho! Peter Quince! Flute the bellows-mender!
Snout the tinker! Starveling! God's my life! Stolen
hence and left me asleep! I have had a most rare
vision. I have had a dream past the wit of man to say
what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about
to expound this dream. Methought I was--there
is no man can tell what. Methought I was and
methought I had--but man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of
man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen,
man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to
conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream
was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this
dream. It shall be called "Bottom's Dream" because
it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the
latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure,
to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her
death.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling.]


QUINCE  Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come
home yet?

STARVELING  He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he
is transported.

FLUTE  If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes
not forward, doth it?

QUINCE  It is not possible. You have not a man in all
Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.

FLUTE  No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraftman
in Athens.

QUINCE  Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very
paramour for a sweet voice.

FLUTE  You must say "paragon." A "paramour" is (God
bless us) a thing of naught.

[Enter Snug the joiner.]


SNUG  Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple,
and there is two or three lords and ladies more
married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all
been made men.

FLUTE  O, sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence
a day during his life. He could not have
'scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given
him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be
hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day
in Pyramus, or nothing!

[Enter Bottom.]


BOTTOM  Where are these lads? Where are these
hearts?

QUINCE  Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy
hour!

BOTTOM  Masters, I am to discourse wonders. But ask
me not what; for, if I tell you, I am not true
Athenian. I will tell you everything right as it fell
out.

QUINCE  Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

BOTTOM  Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that
the Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,
good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man
look o'er his part. For the short and the long is, our
play is preferred. In any case, let Thisbe have clean
linen, and let not him that plays the lion pare his
nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws.
And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for
we are to utter sweet breath, and I do not doubt but
to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more
words. Away! Go, away!
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, Lords, and
Attendants.]


HIPPOLYTA
'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

THESEUS
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold:
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to
heaven,
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination
That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear!

HIPPOLYTA
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More witnesseth than fancy's images
And grows to something of great constancy,
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

[Enter Lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and Helena.]


THESEUS
Here come the lovers full of joy and mirth.--
Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!

LYSANDER  More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!

THESEUS
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we
have
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bedtime?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE, [coming forward]  Here, mighty Theseus.

THESEUS
Say what abridgment have you for this evening,
What masque, what music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time if not with some delight?

PHILOSTRATE, [giving Theseus a paper]
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.

THESEUS
"The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp."
We'll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."
That is an old device, and it was played
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
"The thrice-three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceased in beggary."
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
"A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth."
"Merry" and "tragical"? "Tedious" and "brief"?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow!
How shall we find the concord of this discord?

PHILOSTRATE
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long
(Which is as brief as I have known a play),
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play,
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.

THESEUS
What are they that do play it?

PHILOSTRATE
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labored in their minds till now,
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories
With this same play, against your nuptial.

THESEUS
And we will hear it.

PHILOSTRATE  No, my noble lord,
It is not for you. I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain
To do you service.

THESEUS  I will hear that play,
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in--and take your places, ladies.
[Philostrate exits.]

HIPPOLYTA
I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.

THESEUS
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIPPOLYTA
He says they can do nothing in this kind.

THESEUS
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears,
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome,
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most, to my capacity.

[Enter Philostrate.]


PHILOSTRATE
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.

THESEUS  Let him approach.

[Enter the Prologue.]


PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our goodwill.
   That you should think we come not to offend,
But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,
   That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider, then, we come but in despite.
   We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is. All for your delight
   We are not here. That you should here repent
   you,
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
[Prologue exits.]

THESEUS  This fellow doth not stand upon points.

LYSANDER  He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt;
he knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is
not enough to speak, but to speak true.

HIPPOLYTA  Indeed he hath played on this prologue like
a child on a recorder--a sound, but not in
government.

THESEUS  His speech was like a tangled chain--nothing
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?

[Enter Pyramus (Bottom), and Thisbe (Flute), and
Wall (Snout), and Moonshine (Starveling), and Lion
(Snug), and Prologue (Quince).]


QUINCE, [as Prologue]
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.
   But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know.
   This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man with lime and roughcast doth present
   "Wall," that vile wall which did these lovers
   sunder;
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are
content
   To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
   Presenteth "Moonshine," for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
   To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which "Lion" hight by name)
   The trusty Thisbe coming first by night
Did scare away or rather did affright;
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
   Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
   And finds his trusty Thisbe's mantle slain.
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
   He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast.
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
   His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
At large discourse, while here they do remain.

THESEUS  I wonder if the lion be to speak.

DEMETRIUS  No wonder, my lord. One lion may when
many asses do.
[Lion, Thisbe, Moonshine, and Prologue exit.]

SNOUT, [as Wall]
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show
That I am that same wall. The truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

THESEUS  Would you desire lime and hair to speak
better?

DEMETRIUS  It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
discourse, my lord.

THESEUS  Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black!
   O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night! O night! Alack, alack, alack!
   I fear my Thisbe's promise is forgot.
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
   That stand'st between her father's ground and
   mine,
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
   Show me thy chink to blink through with mine
   eyne.
Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for
this.
   But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
   Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

THESEUS  The wall, methinks, being sensible, should
curse again.

BOTTOM  No, in truth, sir, he should not. "Deceiving
me" is Thisbe's cue. She is to enter now, and I am
to spy her through the wall. You shall see it will fall
pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]


FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans
   For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
   Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
I see a voice! Now will I to the chink
   To spy an I can hear my Thisbe's face.
Thisbe?

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
My love! Thou art my love, I think.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
   Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace,
And, like Limander, am I trusty still.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.
[Bottom and Flute exit.]

SNOUT, [as Wall]
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so,
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.	[He exits.]

THESEUS  Now is the wall down between the two
neighbors.

DEMETRIUS  No remedy, my lord, when walls are so
willful to hear without warning.

HIPPOLYTA  This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.

THESEUS  The best in this kind are but shadows, and
the worst are no worse, if imagination amend
them.

HIPPOLYTA  It must be your imagination, then, and not
theirs.

THESEUS  If we imagine no worse of them than they of
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here
come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

[Enter Lion (Snug) and Moonshine (Starveling).]


SNUG, [as Lion]
You ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear
   The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on
   floor,
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
   When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

THESEUS  A very gentle beast, and of a good
conscience.

DEMETRIUS  The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I
saw.

LYSANDER  This lion is a very fox for his valor.

THESEUS  True, and a goose for his discretion.

DEMETRIUS  Not so, my lord, for his valor cannot carry
his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.

THESEUS  His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his
valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well.
Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the
Moon.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.

DEMETRIUS  He should have worn the horns on his
head.

THESEUS  He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible
within the circumference.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.
Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be.

THESEUS  This is the greatest error of all the rest; the
man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else
"the man i' th' moon"?

DEMETRIUS  He dares not come there for the candle,
for you see, it is already in snuff.

HIPPOLYTA  I am aweary of this moon. Would he would
change.

THESEUS  It appears by his small light of discretion that
he is in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason,
we must stay the time.

LYSANDER  Proceed, Moon.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]   All that I have to say is to tell
you that the lanthorn is the moon, I the man i' th'
moon, this thornbush my thornbush, and this dog
my dog.

DEMETRIUS  Why, all these should be in the lanthorn,
for all these are in the moon. But silence. Here
comes Thisbe.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]


FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?

SNUG, [as Lion]  O!
[The Lion roars. Thisbe runs off,
dropping her mantle.]

DEMETRIUS  Well roared, Lion.

THESEUS  Well run, Thisbe.

HIPPOLYTA  Well shone, Moon. Truly, the Moon shines
with a good grace.
[Lion worries the mantle.]

THESEUS  Well moused, Lion.

[Enter Pyramus (Bottom).]


DEMETRIUS  And then came Pyramus.
[Lion exits.]

LYSANDER  And so the lion vanished.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.
   I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright,
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
   I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.--
      But stay! O spite!
      But mark, poor knight,
   What dreadful dole is here!
      Eyes, do you see!
      How can it be!
   O dainty duck! O dear!
      Thy mantle good--
      What, stained with blood?
   Approach, ye Furies fell!
      O Fates, come, come,
      Cut thread and thrum,
   Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!

THESEUS  This passion, and the death of a dear friend,
would go near to make a man look sad.

HIPPOLYTA  Beshrew my heart but I pity the man.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
   Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear,
Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame
   That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with
   cheer?
      Come, tears, confound!
      Out, sword, and wound
   The pap of Pyramus;
      Ay, that left pap,
      Where heart doth hop.	[Pyramus stabs himself.]
   Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
      Now am I dead;
      Now am I fled;
   My soul is in the sky.
      Tongue, lose thy light!
      Moon, take thy flight!	[Moonshine exits.]
   Now die, die, die, die, die.	[Pyramus falls.]

DEMETRIUS  No die, but an ace for him, for he is but
one.

LYSANDER  Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is
nothing.

THESEUS  With the help of a surgeon he might yet
recover and yet prove an ass.

HIPPOLYTA  How chance Moonshine is gone before
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?

THESEUS  She will find him by starlight.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]

Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.

HIPPOLYTA  Methinks she should not use a long one for
such a Pyramus. I hope she will be brief.

DEMETRIUS  A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus,
which Thisbe, is the better: he for a man, God
warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us.

LYSANDER  She hath spied him already with those
sweet eyes.

DEMETRIUS  And thus she means, videlicet--

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
	      Asleep, my love?
	      What, dead, my dove?
	   O Pyramus, arise!
	      Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
	      Dead? Dead? A tomb
	   Must cover thy sweet eyes.
	      These lily lips,
	      This cherry nose,
	   These yellow cowslip cheeks
	      Are gone, are gone!
	      Lovers, make moan;
	   His eyes were green as leeks.
	      O Sisters Three,
	      Come, come to me
	   With hands as pale as milk.
	      Lay them in gore,
	      Since you have shore
	   With shears his thread of silk.
	      Tongue, not a word!
	      Come, trusty sword,
	   Come, blade, my breast imbrue!
[Thisbe stabs herself.]
	      And farewell, friends.
	      Thus Thisbe ends.
	   Adieu, adieu, adieu.	[Thisbe falls.]

THESEUS  Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the
dead.

DEMETRIUS  Ay, and Wall too.
[Bottom and Flute arise.]

BOTTOM  No, I assure you, the wall is down that
parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the
Epilogue or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?

THESEUS  No epilogue, I pray you. For your play needs
no excuse. Never excuse. For when the players are
all dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if
he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged
himself in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine
tragedy; and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged.
But, come, your Bergomask. Let your
epilogue alone.
[Dance, and the players exit.]
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed! 'Tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatched.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.	[They exit.]

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]


ROBIN
	Now the hungry lion roars,
	   And the wolf behowls the moon,
	Whilst the heavy plowman snores,
	   All with weary task fordone.
	Now the wasted brands do glow,
	   Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
	Puts the wretch that lies in woe
	   In remembrance of a shroud.
	Now it is the time of night
	   That the graves, all gaping wide,
	Every one lets forth his sprite
	   In the church-way paths to glide.
	And we fairies, that do run
	   By the triple Hecate's team
	From the presence of the sun,
	   Following darkness like a dream,
	Now are frolic. Not a mouse
	Shall disturb this hallowed house.
	I am sent with broom before,
	To sweep the dust behind the door.

[Enter Oberon and Titania, King and Queen of Fairies,
with all their train.]


OBERON
	Through the house give glimmering light,
	   By the dead and drowsy fire.
	Every elf and fairy sprite,
	   Hop as light as bird from brier,
	And this ditty after me,
	Sing and dance it trippingly.

TITANIA
	First rehearse your song by rote,
	To each word a warbling note.
	Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
	Will we sing and bless this place.
[Oberon leads the Fairies in song and dance.]

OBERON
	Now, until the break of day,
	Through this house each fairy stray.
	To the best bride-bed will we,
	Which by us shall blessed be,
	And the issue there create
	Ever shall be fortunate.
	So shall all the couples three
	Ever true in loving be,
	And the blots of Nature's hand
	Shall not in their issue stand.
	Never mole, harelip, nor scar,
	Nor mark prodigious, such as are
	Despised in nativity,
	Shall upon their children be.
	With this field-dew consecrate
	Every fairy take his gait,
	And each several chamber bless,
	Through this palace, with sweet peace.
	And the owner of it blest,
	Ever shall in safety rest.
	Trip away. Make no stay.
	Meet me all by break of day.
[All but Robin exit.]

ROBIN
	If we shadows have offended,
	Think but this and all is mended:
	That you have but slumbered here
	While these visions did appear.
	And this weak and idle theme,
	No more yielding but a dream,
	Gentles, do not reprehend.
	If you pardon, we will mend.
	And, as I am an honest Puck,
	If we have unearned luck
	Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue,
	We will make amends ere long.
	Else the Puck a liar call.
	So good night unto you all.
	Give me your hands, if we be friends,
	And Robin shall restore amends.
[He exits.]

The Merry Wives of Windsor
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/the-merry-wives-of-windsor/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
MISTRESS FORD
FORD, her husband
Their servants:
  JOHN
  ROBERT
MISTRESS PAGE
PAGE, her husband
ANNE, their daughter
WILLIAM, their son
DOCTOR CAIUS, a French doctor, suitor to Anne Page
MISTRESS QUICKLY, the doctor's housekeeper
JOHN RUGBY, the doctor's manservant
SIR HUGH Evans, a Welsh parson
HOST of the Garter Inn
Windsor Children, disguised as fairies
Sir John FALSTAFF, an impoverished knight
Falstaff's servants:
  ROBIN, his page
  BARDOLPH
  PISTOL
  NYM
FENTON, a gentleman, suitor to Anne Page
Robert SHALLOW, a visiting justice of the peace
Abraham SLENDER, his nephew, a young gentleman suitor to Anne Page
SIMPLE, Slender's servant


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Justice Shallow, Slender, and Sir Hugh Evans.]


SHALLOW  Sir Hugh, persuade me not. I will make a
Star-Chamber matter of it. If he were twenty Sir
John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow,
Esquire.

SLENDER  In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace
and Coram.

SHALLOW  Ay, Cousin Slender, and Custalorum.

SLENDER  Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born,
Master Parson, who writes himself "Armigero"
in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation--
"Armigero!"

SHALLOW  Ay, that I do, and have done any time these
three hundred years.

SLENDER  All his successors gone before him hath
done 't, and all his ancestors that come after him
may. They may give the dozen white luces in their
coat.

SHALLOW  It is an old coat.

SIR HUGH  The dozen white louses do become an old
coat well. It agrees well, passant. It is a familiar
beast to man and signifies love.

SHALLOW  The luce is the fresh fish. The salt fish is an
old coat.

SLENDER  I may quarter, coz.

SHALLOW  You may, by marrying.

SIR HUGH  It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.

SHALLOW  Not a whit.

SIR HUGH  Yes, py 'r Lady. If he has a quarter of your
coat, there is but three skirts for yourself, in my
simple conjectures. But that is all one. If Sir John
Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you,
I am of the Church, and will be glad to do my
benevolence to make atonements and compromises
between you.

SHALLOW  The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.

SIR HUGH  It is not meet the Council hear a riot. There
is no fear of Got in a riot. The Council, look you,
shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear
a riot. Take your visaments in that.

SHALLOW  Ha! O' my life, if I were young again, the
sword should end it.

SIR HUGH  It is petter that friends is the sword, and end
it. And there is also another device in my prain,
which peradventure prings goot discretions with
it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master
Thomas Page, which is pretty virginity.

SLENDER  Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair
and speaks small like a woman?

SIR HUGH  It is that fery person for all the 'orld, as just
as you will desire. And seven hundred pounds of
moneys, and gold, and silver, is her grandsire upon
his death's-bed (Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!)
give, when she is able to overtake seventeen
years old. It were a goot motion if we leave our
pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between
Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.

SLENDER  Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred
pound?

SIR HUGH  Ay, and her father is make her a petter
penny.

SLENDER  I know the young gentlewoman. She has
good gifts.

SIR HUGH  Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is
goot gifts.

SHALLOW  Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff
there?

SIR HUGH  Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I
do despise one that is false, or as I despise one that
is not true. The knight Sir John is there, and I beseech
you be ruled by your well-willers. I will peat
the door for Master Page. [He knocks.] What ho?
Got pless your house here.

PAGE, [within]  Who's there?

SIR HUGH  Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and
Justice Shallow, and here young Master Slender,
that peradventures shall tell you another tale, if
matters grow to your likings.

[Enter Master Page.]


PAGE  I am glad to see your Worships well. I thank you
for my venison, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  Master Page, I am glad to see you. Much
good do it your good heart! I wished your venison
better; it was ill killed. How doth good Mistress
Page? And I thank you always with my heart, la,
with my heart.

PAGE  Sir, I thank you.

SHALLOW  Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.

PAGE  I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

SLENDER  How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I
heard say he was outrun on Cotsall.

PAGE  It could not be judged, sir.

SLENDER  You'll not confess, you'll not confess.

SHALLOW  That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your
fault. 'Tis a good dog.

PAGE  A cur, sir.

SHALLOW  Sir, he's a good dog and a fair dog. Can there
be more said? He is good and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff
here?

PAGE  Sir, he is within, and I would I could do a good
office between you.

SIR HUGH  It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.

SHALLOW  He hath wronged me, Master Page.

PAGE  Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.

SHALLOW  If it be confessed, it is not redressed. Is not
that so, Master Page? He hath wronged me, indeed
he hath; at a word, he hath. Believe me. Robert
Shallow, Esquire, saith he is wronged.

[Enter Sir John Falstaff, Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol.]


PAGE  Here comes Sir John.

FALSTAFF  Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me
to the King?

SHALLOW  Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my
deer, and broke open my lodge.

FALSTAFF  But not kissed your keeper's daughter.

SHALLOW  Tut, a pin. This shall be answered.

FALSTAFF  I will answer it straight: I have done all this.
That is now answered.

SHALLOW  The Council shall know this.

FALSTAFF  'Twere better for you if it were known in
counsel. You'll be laughed at.

SIR HUGH  Pauca verba, Sir John, good worts.

FALSTAFF  Good worts? Good cabbage!--Slender, I
broke your head. What matter have you against
me?

SLENDER  Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against
you and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph,
Nym, and Pistol.

BARDOLPH  You Banbury cheese!

SLENDER  Ay, it is no matter.

PISTOL  How now, Mephostophilus?

SLENDER  Ay, it is no matter.

NYM  Slice, I say! Pauca, pauca. Slice, that's my humor.

SLENDER, [to Shallow]  Where's Simple, my man?
Can you tell, cousin?

SIR HUGH  Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand;
there is three umpires in this matter, as I understand:
that is, Master Page (fidelicet Master Page);
and there is myself (fidelicet myself); and the three
party is, lastly and finally, mine Host of the Garter.

PAGE  We three to hear it and end it between them.

SIR HUGH  Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my
notebook, and we will afterwards 'ork upon the
cause with as great discreetly as we can.

FALSTAFF  Pistol.

PISTOL  He hears with ears.

SIR HUGH  The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this,
"He hears with ear"? Why, it is affectations.

FALSTAFF  Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?

SLENDER  Ay, by these gloves, did he--or I would I
might never come in mine own great chamber
again else--of seven groats in mill-sixpences,
and two Edward shovel-boards that cost me two
shilling and twopence apiece of Yed Miller, by
these gloves.

FALSTAFF  Is this true, Pistol?

SIR HUGH  No, it is false, if it is a pickpurse.

PISTOL  Ha, thou mountain foreigner!--Sir John and
master mine, I combat challenge of this latten
bilbo.--Word of denial in thy labras here! Word of
denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.

SLENDER, [indicating Nym]  By these gloves, then 'twas
he.

NYM  Be avised, sir, and pass good humors. I will say
"marry trap with you" if you run the nuthook's
humor on me. That is the very note of it.

SLENDER  By this hat, then, he in the red face had it.
For, though I cannot remember what I did when
you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an
ass.

FALSTAFF  What say you, Scarlet and John?

BARDOLPH  Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman
had drunk himself out of his five sentences.

SIR HUGH  It is "his five senses." Fie, what the ignorance
is!

BARDOLPH, [to Falstaff]  And being fap, sir, was, as
they say, cashiered. And so conclusions passed the
careers.

SLENDER  Ay, you spake in Latin then too. But 'tis no
matter. I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again but in
honest, civil, godly company, for this trick. If I be
drunk, I'll be drunk with those that have the fear of
God, and not with drunken knaves.

SIR HUGH  So Got 'udge me, that is a virtuous mind.

FALSTAFF  You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen.
You hear it.

[Enter Anne Page with wine.]


PAGE  Nay, daughter, carry the wine in. We'll drink
within.	[Anne Page exits.]

SLENDER  O heaven, this is Mistress Anne Page.

[Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.]


PAGE  How now, Mistress Ford?

FALSTAFF  Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well
met. By your leave, good mistress.	[He kisses her.]

PAGE  Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome.--Come, we
have a hot venison pasty to dinner. Come, gentlemen,
I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.
[All but Slender, Shallow, and Sir Hugh exit.]

SLENDER  I had rather than forty shillings I had my
book of Songs and Sonnets here!

[Enter Simple.]

How now, Simple? Where have you been? I must
wait on myself, must I? You have not the Book of
Riddles about you, have you?

SIMPLE  Book of Riddles? Why, did you not lend it to
Alice Shortcake upon Allhallowmas last, a fortnight
afore Michaelmas?

SHALLOW, [to Slender]  Come, coz; come, coz. We stay
for you. A word with you, coz. Marry, this, coz:
there is, as 'twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made
afar off by Sir Hugh here. Do you understand me?

SLENDER  Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable. If it be
so, I shall do that that is reason.

SHALLOW  Nay, but understand me.

SLENDER  So I do, sir.

SIR HUGH  Give ear to his motions, Master Slender. I
will description the matter to you, if you be capacity
of it.

SLENDER  Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says. I
pray you, pardon me. He's a Justice of Peace in his
country, simple though I stand here.

SIR HUGH  But that is not the question. The question is
concerning your marriage.

SHALLOW  Ay, there's the point, sir.

SIR HUGH  Marry, is it, the very point of it--to Mistress
Anne Page.

SLENDER  Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
reasonable demands.

SIR HUGH  But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command
to know that of your mouth, or of your lips;
for divers philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of
the mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your
good will to the maid?

SHALLOW  Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?

SLENDER  I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one
that would do reason.

SIR HUGH  Nay, Got's lords and His ladies! You must
speak positable, if you can carry her your desires
towards her.

SHALLOW  That you must. Will you, upon good dowry,
marry her?

SLENDER  I will do a greater thing than that, upon your
request, cousin, in any reason.

SHALLOW  Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz.
What I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the
maid?

SLENDER  I will marry her, sir, at your request. But if
there be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven
may decrease it upon better acquaintance, when
we are married and have more occasion to know
one another. I hope upon familiarity will grow
more content. But if you say "Marry her," I will
marry her. That I am freely dissolved, and
dissolutely.

SIR HUGH  It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is
in the 'ord "dissolutely." The 'ort is, according to
our meaning, "resolutely." His meaning is good.

SHALLOW  Ay, I think my cousin meant well.

SLENDER  Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!

[Enter Anne Page.]


SHALLOW  Here comes fair Mistress Anne.--Would I
were young for your sake, Mistress Anne.

ANNE  The dinner is on the table. My father desires
your Worships' company.

SHALLOW  I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.

SIR HUGH  'Od's plessed will, I will not be absence at
the grace.	[Sir Hugh and Shallow exit.]

ANNE, [to Slender]  Will 't please your Worship to come
in, sir?

SLENDER  No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily. I am very
well.

ANNE  The dinner attends you, sir.

SLENDER  I am not ahungry, I thank you, forsooth. [(To
Simple.)] Go, sirrah, for all you are my man, go
wait upon my cousin Shallow. [(Simple exits.)] A
Justice of Peace sometime may be beholding to his
friend for a man. I keep but three men and a boy
yet, till my mother be dead. But what though? Yet
I live like a poor gentleman born.

ANNE  I may not go in without your Worship. They will
not sit till you come.

SLENDER  I' faith, I'll eat nothing. I thank you as much
as though I did.

ANNE  I pray you, sir, walk in.

SLENDER  I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised
my shin th' other day with playing at sword and
dagger with a master of fence--three veneys for a
dish of stewed prunes--and, by my troth, I cannot
abide the smell of hot meat since. Why do your
dogs bark so? Be there bears i' th' town?

ANNE  I think there are, sir. I heard them talked of.

SLENDER  I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel
at it as any man in England. You are afraid if
you see the bear loose, are you not?

ANNE  Ay, indeed, sir.

SLENDER  That's meat and drink to me, now. I have
seen Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken
him by the chain. But, I warrant you, the women
have so cried and shrieked at it that it passed. But
women, indeed, cannot abide 'em; they are very ill-favored
rough things.

[Enter Page.]


PAGE  Come, gentle Master Slender, come. We stay for
you.

SLENDER  I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.

PAGE  By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,
come.

SLENDER  Nay, pray you, lead the way.

PAGE  Come on, sir.

SLENDER  Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.

ANNE  Not I, sir. Pray you, keep on.

SLENDER  Truly, I will not go first, truly, la! I will not do
you that wrong.

ANNE  I pray you, sir.

SLENDER  I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple.]


SIR HUGH  Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius'
house which is the way. And there dwells one Mistress
Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse,
or his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry--his
washer and his wringer.

SIMPLE  Well, sir.

SIR HUGH  Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter
[(handing him a paper),] for it is a 'oman that altogether's
acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page;
and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page. I pray
you, be gone. I will make an end of my dinner;
there's pippins and cheese to come.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff, Host, Bardolph, Nym, Pistol,
and Robin, Falstaff's Page.]


FALSTAFF  Mine Host of the Garter!

HOST  What says my bullyrook? Speak scholarly and
wisely.

FALSTAFF  Truly, mine Host, I must turn away some of
my followers.

HOST  Discard, bully Hercules, cashier. Let them wag;
trot, trot.

FALSTAFF  I sit at ten pounds a week.

HOST  Thou 'rt an emperor--Caesar, Keiser, and
Pheazar. I will entertain Bardolph. He shall draw,
he shall tap. Said I well, bully Hector?

FALSTAFF  Do so, good mine Host.

HOST  I have spoke. Let him follow.--Let me see thee
froth and lime. I am at a word. Follow.
[Host exits.]

FALSTAFF  Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good
trade. An old cloak makes a new jerkin, a withered
servingman a fresh tapster. Go. Adieu.

BARDOLPH  It is a life that I have desired. I will thrive.

PISTOL  O base Hungarian wight, wilt thou the spigot
wield?	[Bardolph exits.]

NYM  He was gotten in drink. Is not the humor
conceited?

FALSTAFF  I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox.
His thefts were too open. His filching was like an
unskillful singer; he kept not time.

NYM  The good humor is to steal at a minute's rest.

PISTOL  "Convey," the wise it call. "Steal"? Foh, a fico
for the phrase!

FALSTAFF  Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

PISTOL  Why, then, let kibes ensue.

FALSTAFF  There is no remedy. I must cony-catch, I
must shift.

PISTOL  Young ravens must have food.

FALSTAFF  Which of you know Ford of this town?

PISTOL  I ken the wight. He is of substance good.

FALSTAFF  My honest lads, I will tell you what I am
about.

PISTOL  Two yards and more.

FALSTAFF  No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the
waist two yards about, but I am now about no
waste; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make
love to Ford's wife. I spy entertainment in her. She
discourses; she carves; she gives the leer of invitation.
I can construe the action of her familiar style;
and the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished
rightly, is "I am Sir John Falstaff's."

PISTOL, [aside to Nym]  He hath studied her will and
translated her will--out of honesty into English.

NYM, [aside to Pistol]  The anchor is deep. Will that
humor pass?

FALSTAFF  Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of
her husband's purse. He hath a legion of angels.

PISTOL, [aside to Nym]  As many devils entertain, and
"To her, boy," say I.

NYM, [aside to Pistol]  The humor rises; it is good.
Humor me the angels.

FALSTAFF, [showing two papers]  I have writ me here a
letter to her; and here another to Page's wife, who
even now gave me good eyes too, examined my
parts with most judicious oeillades. Sometimes
the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes
my portly belly.

PISTOL, [aside to Nym]  Then did the sun on dunghill
shine.

NYM, [aside to Pistol]  I thank thee for that humor.

FALSTAFF  O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with
such a greedy intention that the appetite of her
eye did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass.
Here's another letter to her. She bears the purse
too; she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty.
I will be cheaters to them both, and they shall be
exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
this letter to Mistress Page--and thou this to Mistress
Ford. We will thrive, lads, we will thrive.

PISTOL
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!

NYM, [to Falstaff]  I will run no base humor. Here, take
the humor-letter. I will keep the havior of
reputation.

FALSTAFF, [giving papers to Robin]
Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.--
Rogues, hence, avaunt, vanish like hailstones, go,
Trudge, plod away i' th' hoof, seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humor of the age:
French thrift, you rogues--myself and skirted page.
[Falstaff and Robin exit.]

PISTOL
Let vultures gripe thy guts! For gourd and fullam
holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor.
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!

NYM  I have operations which be humors of revenge.

PISTOL  Wilt thou revenge?

NYM  By welkin and her star!

PISTOL  With wit or steel?

NYM  With both the humors, I. I will discuss the
humor of this love to Ford.

PISTOL
And I to Page shall eke unfold
   How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
   And his soft couch defile.

NYM  My humor shall not cool. I will incense Ford to
deal with poison. I will possess him with yellowness,
for the revolt of mine is dangerous. That is
my true humor.

PISTOL  Thou art the Mars of malcontents. I second
thee. Troop on.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Mistress Quickly and Simple.]


MISTRESS QUICKLY  What, John Rugby! [(Enter John
Rugby.)] I pray thee, go to the casement and see if
you can see my master, Master Doctor Caius, coming.
If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience
and the King's English.

RUGBY  I'll go watch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Go, and we'll have a posset for 't
soon at night, in faith, at the latter end of a seacoal
fire. [(Rugby exits.)] An honest, willing, kind fellow
as ever servant shall come in house withal; and, I
warrant you, no telltale nor no breed-bate. His
worst fault is that he is given to prayer. He is something
peevish that way, but nobody but has his
fault. But let that pass. Peter Simple you say your
name is?

SIMPLE  Ay, for fault of a better.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  And Master Slender's your master?

SIMPLE  Ay, forsooth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Does he not wear a great round
beard like a glover's paring knife?

SIMPLE  No, forsooth. He hath but a little wee face,
with a little yellow beard, a Cain-colored beard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  A softly-sprited man, is he not?

SIMPLE  Ay, forsooth. But he is as tall a man of his
hands as any is between this and his head. He hath
fought with a warrener.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  How say you? O, I should remember
him. Does he not hold up his head, as it were,
and strut in his gait?

SIMPLE  Yes, indeed, does he.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Well, heaven send Anne Page no
worse fortune! Tell Master Parson Evans I will do
what I can for your master. Anne is a good girl, and
I wish--

[Enter Rugby.]


RUGBY  Out, alas! Here comes my master.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  We shall all be shent.--Run in here,
good young man. Go into this closet. He will not
stay long. [(Simple exits.)] What, John Rugby!
John! What, John, I say! Go, John, go enquire for
my master. I doubt he be not well, that he comes
not home.	[Rugby exits.]
[(She sings.)] And down, down, adown 'a, etc.

[Enter Doctor Caius.]


DOCTOR CAIUS  Vat is you sing? I do not like dese toys.
Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet un boitier
vert, a box, a green-a box. Do intend vat I speak?
A green-a box.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Ay, forsooth. I'll fetch it you.
[(Aside.)] I am glad he went not in himself. If he
had found the young man, he would have been
horn-mad.	[She exits.]

DOCTOR CAIUS  Fe, fe, fe, fe! Ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
m'en vais a la cour--la grande affaire.

[Enter Mistress Quickly with a small box.]


MISTRESS QUICKLY  Is it this, sir?

DOCTOR CAIUS  Oui, mets-le a mon pocket. Depeche,
quickly. Vere is dat knave Rugby?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  What, John Rugby, John!

[Enter Rugby.]


RUGBY  Here, sir.

DOCTOR CAIUS  You are John Rugby, and you are Jack
Rugby. Come, take-a your rapier, and come after
my heel to the court.

RUGBY  'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's
me! Qu'ai-j'oublie? Dere is some simples in my
closet dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave
behind.	[He exits.]

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Ay me! He'll find the young man
there, and be mad!

[Enter Doctor Caius.]


DOCTOR CAIUS  O diable, diable! Vat is in my closet? Villainy!
Larron! [(Pulling out Simple.)] Rugby, my
rapier!

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Good master, be content.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Wherefore shall I be content-a?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  The young man is an honest man.

DOCTOR CAIUS  What shall de honest man do in my
closet? Dere is no honest man dat shall come in
my closet.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic.
Hear the truth of it. He came of an errand to me
from Parson Hugh.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Vell?

SIMPLE  Ay, forsooth. To desire her to--

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Peace, I pray you.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Peace-a your tongue.--Speak-a your
tale.

SIMPLE  To desire this honest gentlewoman, your
maid, to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page
for my master in the way of marriage.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  This is all, indeed, la! But I'll ne'er
put my finger in the fire, and need not.

DOCTOR CAIUS, [to Simple]  Sir Hugh send-a you?--
Rugby, baille me some paper.--Tarry you a little-a
while.

[Rugby brings paper, and Doctor Caius writes.]



MISTRESS QUICKLY, [aside to Simple]  I am glad he is so
quiet. If he had been throughly moved, you should
have heard him so loud and so melancholy. But
notwithstanding, man, I'll do you your master
what good I can. And the very yea and the no is,
the French doctor, my master--I may call him my
master, look you, for I keep his house, and I wash,
wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink,
make the beds, and do all myself--

SIMPLE, [aside to Quickly]  'Tis a great charge to come
under one body's hand.

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [aside to Simple]  Are you advised o'
that? You shall find it a great charge. And to be up
early and down late. But notwithstanding--to tell
you in your ear; I would have no words of it--my
master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page.
But notwithstanding that, I know Anne's mind.
That's neither here nor there.

DOCTOR CAIUS, [handing paper to Simple]  You, jack'nape,
give-a this letter to Sir Hugh. By gar, it is a
shallenge. I will cut his troat in de park, and I will
teach a scurvy jackanape priest to meddle or
make. You may be gone. It is not good you tarry
here.--By gar, I will cut all his two stones. By gar,
he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog.
[Simple exits.]

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

DOCTOR CAIUS  It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a
me dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I
vill kill de jack priest; and I have appointed mine
Host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar,
I will myself have Anne Page.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall
be well. We must give folks leave to prate. What
the goodyear!

DOCTOR CAIUS  Rugby, come to the court with me. [(To
Mistress Quickly.)] By gar, if I have not Anne Page,
I shall turn your head out of my door.--Follow my
heels, Rugby.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  You shall have Anne--
[Caius and Rugby exit.]
fool's head of your own. No, I know Anne's mind
for that. Never a woman in Windsor knows more
of Anne's mind than I do, nor can do more than I
do with her, I thank heaven.

FENTON, [within]  Who's within there, ho?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Who's there, I trow? Come near the
house, I pray you.

[Enter Fenton.]


FENTON  How now, good woman? How dost thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  The better that it pleases your good
Worship to ask.

FENTON  What news? How does pretty Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and
honest, and gentle; and one that is your friend, I
can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.

FENTON  Shall I do any good, think'st thou? Shall I not
lose my suit?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Troth, sir, all is in His hands above.
But notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn
on a book she loves you. Have not your Worship a
wart above your eye?

FENTON  Yes, marry, have I. What of that?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Well, thereby hangs a tale. Good
faith, it is such another Nan! But, I detest, an honest
maid as ever broke bread. We had an hour's
talk of that wart. I shall never laugh but in that
maid's company. But, indeed, she is given too
much to allicholy and musing. But, for you,--well,
go to.

FENTON  Well, I shall see her today. Hold, there's
money for thee. [(He hands her money.)] Let me
have thy voice in my behalf. If thou see'st her before
me, commend me.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Will I? I' faith, that we will. And I
will tell your Worship more of the wart the next
time we have confidence, and of other wooers.

FENTON  Well, farewell. I am in great haste now.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Farewell to your Worship.
[Fenton exits.]
Truly an honest gentleman--but Anne loves him
not, for I know Anne's mind as well as another
does. Out upon 't! What have I forgot?
[She exits.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Mistress Page reading a letter.]


MISTRESS PAGE  What, have I 'scaped love letters in
the holiday time of my beauty, and am I now a
subject for them? Let me see.
[She reads.]
Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love
use Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for
his counselor. You are not young; no more am I. Go
to, then, there's sympathy. You are merry; so am I.
Ha, ha, then, there's more sympathy. You love sack,
and so do I. Would you desire better sympathy? Let
it suffice thee, Mistress Page--at the least, if the love
of soldier can suffice--that I love thee. I will not say
pity me--'tis not a soldier-like phrase--but I say love
me. By me,
	Thine own true knight,
	By day or night,
	Or any kind of light,
	With all his might
	For thee to fight,
John Falstaff.
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked
world! One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with
age, to show himself a young gallant! What an
unweighed behavior hath this Flemish drunkard
picked--with the devil's name!--out of my conversation,
that he dares in this manner assay me?
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my
mirth. Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill
in the Parliament for the putting down of men.
How shall I be revenged on him? For revenged I
will be, as sure as his guts are made of puddings.

[Enter Mistress Ford.]


MISTRESS FORD  Mistress Page! Trust me, I was going to
your house.

MISTRESS PAGE  And, trust me, I was coming to you.
You look very ill.

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, I'll ne'er believe that. I have to
show to the contrary.

MISTRESS PAGE  Faith, but you do, in my mind.

MISTRESS FORD  Well, I do, then. Yet I say I could show
you to the contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some
counsel.

MISTRESS PAGE  What's the matter, woman?

MISTRESS FORD  O woman, if it were not for one trifling
respect, I could come to such honor!

MISTRESS PAGE  Hang the trifle, woman; take the honor.
What is it? Dispense with trifles. What is it?

MISTRESS FORD  If I would but go to hell for an eternal
moment or so, I could be knighted.

MISTRESS PAGE  What, thou liest! Sir Alice Ford? These
knights will hack, and so thou shouldst not alter
the article of thy gentry.

MISTRESS FORD  We burn daylight. Here, read, read. Perceive
how I might be knighted. [(She gives a paper
to Mistress Page, who reads it.)] I shall think the
worse of fat men as long as I have an eye to make
difference of men's liking. And yet he would not
swear; praised women's modesty; and gave such
orderly and well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness
that I would have sworn his disposition
would have gone to the truth of his words. But
they do no more adhere and keep place together
than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of
"Greensleeves." What tempest, I trow, threw this
whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly, ashore
at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I
think the best way were to entertain him with hope
till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his
own grease. Did you ever hear the like?

MISTRESS PAGE  Letter for letter, but that the name of
Page and Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this
mystery of ill opinions, here's the twin brother of
thy letter. [(She gives a paper to Mistress Ford, who
reads it.)] But let thine inherit first, for I protest
mine never shall. I warrant he hath a thousand of
these letters writ with blank space for different
names--sure, more--and these are of the second
edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he
cares not what he puts into the press, when he
would put us two. I had rather be a giantess and lie
under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you twenty
lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.

MISTRESS FORD  Why, this is the very same--the very
hand, the very words. What doth he think of us?

MISTRESS PAGE  Nay, I know not. It makes me almost
ready to wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain
myself like one that I am not acquainted
withal; for, sure, unless he know some strain in
me that I know not myself, he would never have
boarded me in this fury.

MISTRESS FORD  "Boarding" call you it? I'll be sure to
keep him above deck.

MISTRESS PAGE  So will I. If he come under my hatches,
I'll never to sea again. Let's be revenged on him.
Let's appoint him a meeting, give him a show of
comfort in his suit, and lead him on with a fine-baited
delay till he hath pawned his horses to mine
Host of the Garter.

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, I will consent to act any villainy
against him that may not sully the chariness of our
honesty. O, that my husband saw this letter! It
would give eternal food to his jealousy.

MISTRESS PAGE  Why, look where he comes, and my
good man too. He's as far from jealousy as I am
from giving him cause, and that, I hope, is an
unmeasurable distance.

MISTRESS FORD  You are the happier woman.

MISTRESS PAGE  Let's consult together against this greasy
knight. Come hither.	[They talk aside.]

[Enter Ford with Pistol, and Page with Nym.]


FORD  Well, I hope it be not so.

PISTOL
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
Sir John affects thy wife.

FORD  Why, sir, my wife is not young.

PISTOL
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford.
He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.

FORD  Love my wife?

PISTOL
With liver burning hot. Prevent,
Or go thou like Sir Acteon, he,
With Ringwood at thy heels.
O, odious is the name!

FORD  What name, sir?

PISTOL  The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by
night.
Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo birds do
sing.--
Away, Sir Corporal Nym.--Believe it, Page. He
speaks sense.	[He exits.]

FORD, [aside]  I will be patient. I will find out this.

NYM, [to Page]  And this is true. I like not the humor of
lying. He hath wronged me in some humors. I
should have borne the humored letter to her; but I
have a sword, and it shall bite upon my necessity.
He loves your wife; there's the short and the long.
My name is Corporal Nym. I speak and I avouch.
'Tis true. My name is Nym, and Falstaff loves your
wife. Adieu. I love not the humor of bread and
cheese. Adieu.	[He exits.]

PAGE, [aside]  "The humor of it," quoth he? Here's a fellow
frights English out of his wits.

FORD, [aside]  I will seek out Falstaff.

PAGE, [aside]  I never heard such a drawling, affecting
rogue.

FORD, [aside]  If I do find it--well.

PAGE, [aside]  I will not believe such a Cataian, though
the priest o' th' town commended him for a true
man.

FORD, [aside]  'Twas a good sensible fellow--well.

[Mistress Page and Mistress Ford come forward.]



PAGE, [to Mistress Page]  How now, Meg?

MISTRESS PAGE  Whither go you, George? Hark you.
[They talk aside.]

MISTRESS FORD, [to Ford]  How now, sweet Frank? Why
art thou melancholy?

FORD  I melancholy? I am not melancholy. Get you
home. Go.

MISTRESS FORD  Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy
head now.--Will you go, Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE  Have with you.--You'll come to dinner,
George? [(Aside to Mistress Ford.)] Look who
comes yonder.

[Enter Mistress Quickly.]

She shall be our messenger to this paltry knight.

MISTRESS FORD  Trust me, I thought on her. She'll fit it.

MISTRESS PAGE, [to Mistress Quickly]  You are come to
see my daughter Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Ay, forsooth. And, I pray, how does
good Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS PAGE  Go in with us and see. We have an
hour's talk with you.
[Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, and
Mistress Quickly exit.]

PAGE  How now, Master Ford?

FORD  You heard what this knave told me, did you not?

PAGE  Yes, and you heard what the other told me?

FORD  Do you think there is truth in them?

PAGE  Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight
would offer it. But these that accuse him in his intent
towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded
men, very rogues, now they be out of service.

FORD  Were they his men?

PAGE  Marry, were they.

FORD  I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at
the Garter?

PAGE  Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him;
and what he gets more of her than sharp words, let
it lie on my head.

FORD  I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be loath
to turn them together. A man may be too confident.
I would have nothing lie on my head. I cannot
be thus satisfied.

[Enter Host.]


PAGE  Look where my ranting Host of the Garter
comes. There is either liquor in his pate or money
in his purse when he looks so merrily.--How now,
mine Host?

HOST  How now, bullyrook? Thou 'rt a gentleman.--
Cavaleiro Justice, I say!

[Enter Shallow.]


SHALLOW  I follow, mine Host, I follow.--Good even
and twenty, good Master Page. Master Page, will
you go with us? We have sport in hand.

HOST  Tell him, Cavaleiro Justice; tell him, bullyrook.

SHALLOW  Sir, there is a fray to be fought between
Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and Caius the French
doctor.

FORD  Good mine Host o' th' Garter, a word with you.

HOST  What say'st thou, my bullyrook?
[The Host and Ford talk aside.]

SHALLOW, [to Page]  Will you go with us to behold it?
My merry Host hath had the measuring of their
weapons and, I think, hath appointed them contrary
places; for, believe me, I hear the parson is no
jester. Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
[Shallow and Page talk aside.]

HOST, [to Ford]  Hast thou no suit against my knight,
my guest cavalier?

FORD  None, I protest. But I'll give you a pottle of
burnt sack to give me recourse to him, and tell him
my name is Brook--only for a jest.

HOST  My hand, bully. Thou shalt have egress and
regress--said I well?--and thy name shall be
Brook. It is a merry knight. [(To Shallow and
Page.)] Will you go, ameers?

SHALLOW  Have with you, mine Host.

PAGE  I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill
in his rapier.

SHALLOW  Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these
times you stand on distance--your passes, stoccados,
and I know not what. 'Tis the heart, Master
Page; 'tis here, 'tis here. I have seen the time, with
my long sword I would have made you four tall
fellows skip like rats.

HOST  Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?

PAGE  Have with you. I had rather hear them scold
than fight.	[Page, Host, and Shallow exit.]

FORD  Though Page be a secure fool and stands so
firmly on his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my
opinion so easily. She was in his company at Page's
house, and what they made there I know not. Well,
I will look further into 't, and I have a disguise to
sound Falstaff. If I find her honest, I lose not my
labor. If she be otherwise, 'tis labor well bestowed.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff and Pistol.]


FALSTAFF  I will not lend thee a penny.

PISTOL  Why then, the world's mine oyster, which I
with sword will open.

FALSTAFF  Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you
should lay my countenance to pawn. I have grated
upon my good friends for three reprieves for you
and your coach-fellow Nym, or else you had
looked through the grate like a gemini of baboons.
I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen my
friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows.
And when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her
fan, I took 't upon mine honor thou hadst it not.

PISTOL  Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen
pence?

FALSTAFF  Reason, you rogue, reason. Think'st thou I'll
endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more
about me. I am no gibbet for you. Go--a short
knife and a throng--to your manor of Pickt-hatch,
go. You'll not bear a letter for me, you rogue? You
stand upon your honor? Why, thou unconfinable
baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the
terms of my honor precise. Ay, ay, I myself sometimes,
leaving the fear of God on the left hand
and hiding mine honor in my necessity, am fain to
shuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet you, rogue,
will ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain
looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold beating
oaths under the shelter of your honor! You will
not do it? You?

PISTOL  I do relent. What would thou more of man?

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN  Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.

FALSTAFF  Let her approach.

[Enter Mistress Quickly.]


MISTRESS QUICKLY  Give your Worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF  Good morrow, goodwife.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Not so, an 't please your Worship.

FALSTAFF  Good maid, then.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  I'll be sworn--as my mother was,
the first hour I was born.

FALSTAFF  I do believe the swearer. What with me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Shall I vouchsafe your Worship a
word or two?

FALSTAFF  Two thousand, fair woman, and I'll vouchsafe
thee the hearing.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  There is one Mistress Ford, sir--I
pray, come a little nearer this ways. I myself dwell
with Master Doctor Caius.

FALSTAFF  Well, on. "Mistress Ford," you say--

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Your Worship says very true. I pray
your Worship, come a little nearer this ways.

FALSTAFF  I warrant thee, nobody hears. Mine own
people, mine own people.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Are they so? God bless them and
make them His servants!

FALSTAFF  Well, "Mistress Ford"--what of her?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Why, sir, she's a good creature.
Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton! Well, heaven
forgive you and all of us, I pray!

FALSTAFF  "Mistress Ford"--come, "Mistress Ford"--

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Marry, this is the short and the long
of it: you have brought her into such a canaries as
'tis wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when
the court lay at Windsor, could never have brought
her to such a canary. Yet there has been knights,
and lords, and gentlemen, with their coaches, I
warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter,
gift after gift, smelling so sweetly--all musk--and
so rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold, and in
such alligant terms, and in such wine and sugar of
the best and the fairest, that would have won any
woman's heart; and, I warrant you, they could
never get an eye-wink of her. I had myself twenty
angels given me this morning, but I defy all angels
in any such sort, as they say, but in the way of
honesty. And, I warrant you, they could never get
her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of
them all. And yet there has been earls--nay, which
is more, pensioners--but, I warrant you, all is one
with her.

FALSTAFF  But what says she to me? Be brief, my good
she-Mercury.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Marry, she hath received your letter,
for the which she thanks you a thousand times,
and she gives you to notify that her husband will
be absence from his house between ten and eleven.

FALSTAFF  Ten and eleven?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Ay, forsooth; and then you may come
and see the picture, she says, that you wot of. Master
Ford, her husband, will be from home. Alas, the
sweet woman leads an ill life with him. He's a very
jealousy man. She leads a very frampold life with
him, good heart.

FALSTAFF  Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to
her. I will not fail her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Why, you say well. But I have another
messenger to your Worship. Mistress Page
hath her hearty commendations to you too; and,
let me tell you in your ear, she's as fartuous a civil
modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will not miss
you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in Windsor,
whoe'er be the other. And she bade me tell
your Worship that her husband is seldom from
home, but she hopes there will come a time. I
never knew a woman so dote upon a man. Surely, I
think you have charms, la! Yes, in truth.

FALSTAFF  Not I, I assure thee. Setting the attraction of
my good parts aside, I have no other charms.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Blessing on your heart for 't!

FALSTAFF  But I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife
and Page's wife acquainted each other how they
love me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  That were a jest indeed! They have
not so little grace, I hope. That were a trick indeed!
But Mistress Page would desire you to send her
your little page, of all loves. Her husband has a
marvelous infection to the little page; and, truly,
Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
Windsor leads a better life than she does. Do what
she will, say what she will, take all, pay all, go to
bed when she list, rise when she list--all is as she
will. And, truly, she deserves it, for if there be a
kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must send
her your page, no remedy.

FALSTAFF  Why, I will.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Nay, but do so then, and, look you,
he may come and go between you both. And in any
case have a nayword, that you may know one another's
mind, and the boy never need to understand
anything; for 'tis not good that children
should know any wickedness. Old folks, you know,
have discretion, as they say, and know the world.

FALSTAFF  Fare thee well. Commend me to them both.
There's my purse. [(He gives her money.)] I am yet
thy debtor.--Boy, go along with this woman. [(Mistress
Quickly and Robin exit.)] This news distracts
me.

PISTOL, [aside]
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers.
Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;
Give fire! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
[He exits.]

FALSTAFF  Sayst thou so, old Jack? Go thy ways. I'll
make more of thy old body than I have done. Will
they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense
of so much money, be now a gainer? Good
body, I thank thee. Let them say 'tis grossly done;
so it be fairly done, no matter.

[Enter Bardolph with wine.]


BARDOLPH  Sir John, there's one Master Brook below
would fain speak with you and be acquainted with
you, and hath sent your Worship a morning's
draught of sack.	[(He hands Falstaff the wine.)]

FALSTAFF  Brook is his name?

BARDOLPH  Ay, sir.

FALSTAFF  Call him in. Such Brooks are welcome to
me that o'erflows such liquor.	[(Bardolph exits.)]
Ah ha, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed
you? Go to. Via!

[Enter Bardolph with Ford disguised as Brook.]


FORD, [as Brook]  God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF  And you, sir. Would you speak with me?

FORD, [as Brook]  I make bold to press with so little
preparation upon you.

FALSTAFF  You're welcome. What's your will?--Give us
leave, drawer.	[Bardolph exits.]

FORD, [as Brook]  Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent
much. My name is Brook.

FALSTAFF  Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance
of you.

FORD, [as Brook]  Good Sir John, I sue for yours--not
to charge you, for I must let you understand I
think myself in better plight for a lender than you
are, the which hath something emboldened me to
this unseasoned intrusion; for they say, if money
go before, all ways do lie open.

FALSTAFF  Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.

FORD, [as Brook]  Troth, and I have a bag of money
here troubles me. [He sets it down.] If you will help
to bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing me
of the carriage.

FALSTAFF  Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your
porter.

FORD, [as Brook]  I will tell you, sir, if you will give me
the hearing.

FALSTAFF  Speak, good Master Brook. I shall be glad
to be your servant.

FORD, [as Brook]  Sir, I hear you are a scholar--I will
be brief with you--and you have been a man long
known to me, though I had never so good means
as desire to make myself acquainted with you. I
shall discover a thing to you wherein I must very
much lay open mine own imperfection. But, good
Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as
you hear them unfolded, turn another into the register
of your own, that I may pass with a reproof
the easier, sith you yourself know how easy it is to
be such an offender.

FALSTAFF  Very well, sir. Proceed.

FORD, [as Brook]  There is a gentlewoman in this
town--her husband's name is Ford.

FALSTAFF  Well, sir.

FORD, [as Brook]  I have long loved her and, I protest
to you, bestowed much on her, followed her with
a doting observance, engrossed opportunities to
meet her, fee'd every slight occasion that could but
niggardly give me sight of her, not only bought
many presents to give her, but have given largely to
many to know what she would have given. Briefly,
I have pursued her as love hath pursued me, which
hath been on the wing of all occasions. But whatsoever
I have merited, either in my mind or in my
means, meed I am sure I have received none, unless
experience be a jewel. That I have purchased
at an infinite rate, and that hath taught me to say
this:
"Love like a shadow flies when substance love
pursues,
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues."

FALSTAFF  Have you received no promise of satisfaction
at her hands?

FORD, [as Brook]  Never.

FALSTAFF  Have you importuned her to such a
purpose?

FORD, [as Brook]  Never.

FALSTAFF  Of what quality was your love, then?

FORD, [as Brook]  Like a fair house built on another
man's ground, so that I have lost my edifice by
mistaking the place where I erected it.

FALSTAFF  To what purpose have you unfolded this to
me?

FORD, [as Brook]  When I have told you that, I have
told you all. Some say that though she appear honest
to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her
mirth so far that there is shrewd construction
made of her. Now, Sir John, here is the heart of my
purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding,
admirable discourse, of great admittance,
authentic in your place and person, generally
allowed for your many warlike, courtlike, and
learned preparations.

FALSTAFF  O, sir!

FORD, [as Brook]  Believe it, for you know it. There is
money. [(He points to the bag.)] Spend it, spend
it, spend more; spend all I have. Only give me so
much of your time in exchange of it as to lay an
amiable siege to the honesty of this Ford's wife.
Use your art of wooing; win her to consent to you.
If any man may, you may as soon as any.

FALSTAFF  Would it apply well to the vehemency of
your affection that I should win what you would
enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very
preposterously.

FORD, [as Brook]  O, understand my drift. She dwells
so securely on the excellency of her honor that the
folly of my soul dares not present itself; she is too
bright to be looked against. Now, could I come to
her with any detection in my hand, my desires had
instance and argument to commend themselves. I
could drive her then from the ward of her purity,
her reputation, her marriage vow, and a thousand
other her defenses, which now are too too strongly
embattled against me. What say you to 't, Sir
John?

FALSTAFF, [taking the bag]  Master Brook, I will first
make bold with your money; next, give me your
hand; and, last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if
you will, enjoy Ford's wife.

FORD, [as Brook]  O, good sir!

FALSTAFF  I say you shall.

FORD, [as Brook]  Want no money, Sir John; you shall
want none.

FALSTAFF  Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you
shall want none. I shall be with her, I may tell you,
by her own appointment. Even as you came in to
me, her assistant or go-between parted from me. I
say I shall be with her between ten and eleven, for
at that time the jealous, rascally knave her husband
will be forth. Come you to me at night. You
shall know how I speed.

FORD, [as Brook]  I am blessed in your acquaintance.
Do you know Ford, sir?

FALSTAFF  Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know
him not. Yet I wrong him to call him poor. They
say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of
money, for the which his wife seems to me well-favored.
I will use her as the key of the cuckoldly
rogue's coffer, and there's my harvest home.

FORD, [as Brook]  I would you knew Ford, sir, that you
might avoid him if you saw him.

FALSTAFF  Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I
will stare him out of his wits. I will awe him with
my cudgel; it shall hang like a meteor o'er the
cuckold's horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I
will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt
lie with his wife. Come to me soon at night. Ford's
a knave, and I will aggravate his style. Thou, Master
Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.
Come to me soon at night.	[Falstaff exits.]

FORD  What a damned epicurean rascal is this! My
heart is ready to crack with impatience. Who says
this is improvident jealousy? My wife hath sent
to him, the hour is fixed, the match is made.
Would any man have thought this? See the hell of
having a false woman: my bed shall be abused, my
coffers ransacked, my reputation gnawn at. And
I shall not only receive this villainous wrong but
stand under the adoption of abominable terms,
and by him that does me this wrong. Terms,
names! "Amaimon" sounds well, "Lucifer" well,
"Barbason" well; yet they are devils' additions, the
names of fiends. But "Cuckold," "Wittoll," "Cuckold"!
The devil himself hath not such a name. Page
is an ass, a secure ass. He will trust his wife, he will
not be jealous. I will rather trust a Fleming with
my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman with my
cheese, an Irishman with my aquavitae bottle, or
a thief to walk my ambling gelding, than my wife
with herself. Then she plots, then she ruminates,
then she devises; and what they think in their
hearts they may effect, they will break their hearts
but they will effect. God be praised for my jealousy!
Eleven o'clock the hour. I will prevent this,
detect my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and laugh
at Page. I will about it. Better three hours too soon
than a minute too late. Fie, fie, fie! Cuckold, cuckold,
cuckold!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Doctor Caius and Rugby.]


DOCTOR CAIUS  Jack Rugby.

RUGBY  Sir?

DOCTOR CAIUS  Vat is the clock, Jack?

RUGBY  'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised
to meet.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, he has save his soul dat he is no
come. He has pray his Pible well dat he is no come.
By gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already if he be
come.

RUGBY  He is wise, sir. He knew your Worship would
kill him if he came.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill
kill him. Take your rapier, Jack. I vill tell you how I
vill kill him.

RUGBY  Alas, sir, I cannot fence.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Villainy, take your rapier.

RUGBY  Forbear. Here's company.

[Enter Page, Shallow, Slender, and Host.]


HOST  God bless thee, bully doctor!

SHALLOW  God save you, Master Doctor Caius!

PAGE  Now, good Master Doctor!

SLENDER  Give you good morrow, sir.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come
for?

HOST  To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;
to see thee here, to see thee there; to see
thy pass, thy puncto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy
distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian?
Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha, bully? What says
my Aesculapius, my Galien, my heart of elder, ha?
Is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, he is de coward jack-priest of de
vorld. He is not show his face.

HOST  Thou art a Castalion King Urinal Hector of
Greece, my boy!

DOCTOR CAIUS  I pray you, bear witness that me have
stay six or seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is
no come.

SHALLOW  He is the wiser man, Master Doctor. He is a
curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies. If you
should fight, you go against the hair of your professions.--
Is it not true, Master Page?

PAGE  Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great
fighter, though now a man of peace.

SHALLOW  Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old
and of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger
itches to make one. Though we are justices and
doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have
some salt of our youth in us. We are the sons of
women, Master Page.

PAGE  'Tis true, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  It will be found so, Master Page.--Master
Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am
sworn of the peace. You have showed yourself a
wise physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself
a wise and patient churchman. You must go with
me, Master Doctor.

HOST  Pardon, guest Justice. [(To Caius.)] A word,
Monsieur Mockwater.

DOCTOR CAIUS  "Mockvater"? Vat is dat?

HOST  "Mockwater," in our English tongue, is "valor,"
bully.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, then I have as much mockvater
as de Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog priest! By gar,
me vill cut his ears.

HOST  He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.

DOCTOR CAIUS  "Clapper-de-claw"? Vat is dat?

HOST  That is, he will make thee amends.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw
me, for, by gar, me vill have it.

HOST  And I will provoke him to 't, or let him wag.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Me tank you for dat.

HOST  And moreover, bully--[(He draws Shallow, Page,
and Slender aside.)] But first, Master guest, and
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
through the town to Frogmore.

PAGE  Sir Hugh is there, is he?

HOST  He is there. See what humor he is in; and I will
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do
well?

SHALLOW  We will do it.

PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER  Adieu, good Master
Doctor.	[Page, Shallow, and Slender exit.]

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, me vill kill de priest, for he speak
for a jackanape to Anne Page.

HOST  Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold
water on thy choler. Go about the fields with me
through Frogmore. I will bring thee where Mistress
Anne Page is, at a farmhouse a-feasting, and
thou shalt woo her. Cried game! Said I well?

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, me dank you vor dat. By gar, I
love you, and I shall procure-a you de good guest:
de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my
patients.

HOST  For the which I will be thy adversary toward
Anne Page. Said I well?

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, 'tis good. Vell said.

HOST  Let us wag, then.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Sir Hugh Evans (with a book and a sword)
and Simple (carrying Sir Hugh's gown).]


SIR HUGH  I pray you now, good Master Slender's servingman
and friend Simple by your name, which
way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls
himself doctor of physic?

SIMPLE  Marry, sir, the Petty-ward, the Park-ward,
every way; Old Windsor way, and every way but
the town way.

SIR HUGH  I most fehemently desire you, you will also
look that way.

SIMPLE  I will, sir.	[He exits.]

SIR HUGH  Pless my soul, how full of cholers I am, and
trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived
me. How melancholies I am! I will knog his
urinals about his knave's costard when I have good
opportunities for the 'ork. Pless my soul!
[Sings.]
	To shallow rivers, to whose falls
	Melodious birds sings madrigals.
	There will we make our peds of roses
	And a thousand fragrant posies.
	To shallow--
Mercy on me, I have a great dispositions to cry.
[Sings.]
	Melodious birds sing madrigals--
	Whenas I sat in Pabylon--
	And a thousand vagram posies.
	To shallow rivers, to whose falls
	Melodious birds sings madrigals.

[Enter Simple.]


SIMPLE  Yonder he is, coming this way, Sir Hugh.

SIR HUGH  He's welcome.
[Sings.]
	To shallow rivers, to whose falls--
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?

SIMPLE  No weapons, sir. There comes my master,
Master Shallow, and another gentleman, from
Frogmore, over the stile, this way.

SIR HUGH  Pray you, give me my gown--or else keep it
in your arms.

[Enter Page, Shallow, and Slender.]


SHALLOW  How now, Master Parson? Good morrow,
good Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the dice,
and a good student from his book, and it is
wonderful.

SLENDER, [aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!

PAGE  God save you, good Sir Hugh!

SIR HUGH  God pless you from His mercy sake, all of
you!

SHALLOW  What, the sword and the word? Do you
study them both, Master Parson?

PAGE  And youthful still--in your doublet and hose
this raw rheumatic day?

SIR HUGH  There is reasons and causes for it.

PAGE  We are come to you to do a good office, Master
Parson.

SIR HUGH  Fery well. What is it?

PAGE  Yonder is a most reverend gentleman who, belike
having received wrong by some person, is at
most odds with his own gravity and patience that
ever you saw.

SHALLOW  I have lived fourscore years and upward. I
never heard a man of his place, gravity, and learning
so wide of his own respect.

SIR HUGH  What is he?

PAGE  I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the
renowned French physician.

SIR HUGH  Got's will and His passion of my heart! I had
as lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.

PAGE  Why?

SIR HUGH  He has no more knowledge in Hibbocrates
and Galen--and he is a knave besides, a cowardly
knave as you would desires to be acquainted
withal.

PAGE, [to Shallow]  I warrant you, he's the man should
fight with him.

SLENDER, [aside]  O, sweet Anne Page!

SHALLOW  It appears so by his weapons. Keep them
asunder. Here comes Doctor Caius.

[Enter Host, Doctor Caius, and Rugby.
Caius and Sir Hugh offer to fight.]


PAGE  Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.

SHALLOW  So do you, good Master Doctor.

HOST  Disarm them, and let them question. Let them
keep their limbs whole and hack our English.
[Page and Shallow disarm Caius and Sir Hugh.]

DOCTOR CAIUS, [to Sir Hugh]  I pray you, let-a me speak
a word with your ear. Verefore vill you not
meet-a me?

SIR HUGH, [aside to Caius]  Pray you, use your patience.
[(Aloud.)] In good time.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog,
John ape.

SIR HUGH, [aside to Caius]  Pray you, let us not be
laughing-stocks to other men's humors. I desire
you in friendship, and I will one way or other
make you amends. [(Aloud.)] By Jeshu, I will knog
your urinal about your knave's cogscomb.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Diable! Jack Rugby, mine Host de Jarteer,
have I not stay for him to kill him? Have I not,
at de place I did appoint?

SIR HUGH  As I am a Christians soul, now look you, this
is the place appointed. I'll be judgment by mine
Host of the Garter.

HOST  Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,
soul-curer and body-curer!

DOCTOR CAIUS  Ay, dat is very good, excellent.

HOST  Peace, I say! Hear mine Host of the Garter. Am
I politic? Am I subtle? Am I a Machiavel? Shall I
lose my doctor? No, he gives me the potions and
the motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my
Sir Hugh? No, he gives me the proverbs and the
no-verbs. [(To Caius.)] Give me thy hand, terrestrial;
so. [(To Sir Hugh.)] Give me thy hand, celestial;
so. Boys of art, I have deceived you both. I
have directed you to wrong places. Your hearts are
mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be
the issue. [(To Page and Shallow.)] Come, lay their
swords to pawn. [(To Caius and Sir Hugh.)] Follow
me, lads of peace, follow, follow, follow.
[Host exits.]

SHALLOW  Afore God, a mad Host. Follow, gentlemen,
follow.

SLENDER, [aside]  O, sweet Anne Page!
[Shallow, Page, and Slender exit.]

DOCTOR CAIUS  Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a
de sot of us, ha, ha?

SIR HUGH  This is well! He has made us his vloutingstog.
I desire you that we may be friends, and let
us knog our prains together to be revenge on this
same scall, scurvy, cogging companion, the Host of
the Garter.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, with all my heart. He promise
to bring me where is Anne Page. By gar, he deceive
me too.

SIR HUGH  Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you,
follow.
[Sir Hugh, Caius, Simple, and Rugby exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Robin followed by Mistress Page.]


MISTRESS PAGE  Nay, keep your way, little gallant. You
were wont to be a follower, but now you are a
leader. Whether had you rather--lead mine eyes,
or eye your master's heels?

ROBIN  I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man
than follow him like a dwarf.

MISTRESS PAGE  O, you are a flattering boy! Now I see
you'll be a courtier.

[Enter Ford.]


FORD  Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?

MISTRESS PAGE  Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at
home?

FORD  Ay, and as idle as she may hang together, for
want of company. I think if your husbands were
dead, you two would marry.

MISTRESS PAGE  Be sure of that--two other husbands.

FORD  Where had you this pretty weathercock?

MISTRESS PAGE  I cannot tell what the dickens his name
is my husband had him of.--What do you call your
knight's name, sirrah?

ROBIN  Sir John Falstaff.

FORD  Sir John Falstaff!

MISTRESS PAGE  He, he. I can never hit on 's name.
There is such a league between my goodman and
he. Is your wife at home indeed?

FORD  Indeed, she is.

MISTRESS PAGE  By your leave, sir. I am sick till I see
her.	[Mistress Page and Robin exit.]

FORD  Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath
he any thinking? Sure they sleep; he hath no use
of them. Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty
mile as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank
twelve score. He pieces out his wife's inclination.
He gives her folly motion and advantage. And now
she's going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her.
A man may hear this shower sing in the wind. And
Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots they are laid,
and our revolted wives share damnation together.
Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck
the borrowed veil of modesty from the so-seeming
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure
and willful Acteon, and to these violent proceedings
all my neighbors shall cry aim. [A clock
strikes.] The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance
bids me search. There I shall find Falstaff. I
shall be rather praised for this than mocked, for it
is as positive as the earth is firm that Falstaff is
there. I will go.

[Enter Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Sir Hugh
Evans, Doctor Caius, and Rugby.]


SHALLOW, PAGE, ETC.  Well met, Master Ford.

FORD  Trust me, a good knot. I have good cheer at
home, and I pray you all go with me.

SHALLOW  I must excuse myself, Master Ford.

SLENDER  And so must I, sir. We have appointed to dine
with Mistress Anne, and I would not break with
her for more money than I'll speak of.

SHALLOW  We have lingered about a match between
Anne Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we
shall have our answer.

SLENDER  I hope I have your good will, Father Page.

PAGE  You have, Master Slender. I stand wholly for
you.--But my wife, Master Doctor, is for you
altogether.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Ay, be-gar, and de maid is love-a me! My
nursh-a Quickly tell me so mush.

HOST, [to Page]  What say you to young Master Fenton?
He capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth, he
writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April
and May. He will carry 't, he will carry 't. 'Tis in his
buttons he will carry 't.

PAGE  Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman
is of no having. He kept company with the
wild Prince and Poins. He is of too high a region;
he knows too much. No, he shall not knit a knot in
his fortunes with the finger of my substance. If he
take her, let him take her simply. The wealth I have
waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that
way.

FORD  I beseech you heartily, some of you go home
with me to dinner. Besides your cheer, you shall
have sport: I will show you a monster. Master Doctor,
you shall go.--So shall you, Master Page.--
And you, Sir Hugh.

SHALLOW  Well, fare you well. We shall have the freer
wooing at Master Page's.
[Shallow and Slender exit.]

DOCTOR CAIUS  Go home, John Rugby. I come anon.
[Rugby exits.]

HOST  Farewell, my hearts. I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.	[He exits.]

FORD, [aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first
with him; I'll make him dance.--Will you go,
gentles?

PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH  Have with you to
see this monster.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.]


MISTRESS FORD  What, John! What, Robert!

MISTRESS PAGE  Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket--

MISTRESS FORD  I warrant.--What, Robert, I say!

[Enter John and Robert with a large buck-basket.]


MISTRESS PAGE  Come, come, come.

MISTRESS FORD  Here, set it down.

MISTRESS PAGE  Give your men the charge. We must be
brief.

MISTRESS FORD  Marry, as I told you before, John and
Robert, be ready here hard by in the brewhouse,
and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and
without any pause or staggering take this basket
on your shoulders. That done, trudge with it in all
haste, and carry it among the whitsters in Datchet
Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close
by the Thames side.

MISTRESS PAGE  You will do it?

MISTRESS FORD  I ha' told them over and over. They lack
no direction.--Be gone, and come when you are
called.	[John and Robert exit.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Here comes little Robin.

[Enter Robin.]


MISTRESS FORD  How now, my eyas-musket? What news
with you?

ROBIN  My master, Sir John, is come in at your back
door, Mistress Ford, and requests your company.

MISTRESS PAGE  You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been
true to us?

ROBIN  Ay, I'll be sworn. My master knows not of your
being here and hath threatened to put me into
everlasting liberty if I tell you of it, for he swears
he'll turn me away.

MISTRESS PAGE  Thou 'rt a good boy. This secrecy of
thine shall be a tailor to thee and shall make thee a
new doublet and hose.--I'll go hide me.

MISTRESS FORD  Do so.--Go tell thy master I am alone.
[(Robin exits.)] Mistress Page, remember you your
cue.

MISTRESS PAGE  I warrant thee. If I do not act it, hiss
me.	[She exits.]

MISTRESS FORD  Go to, then. We'll use this unwholesome
humidity, this gross-wat'ry pumpion. We'll
teach him to know turtles from jays.

[Enter Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  "Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?"
Why, now let me die, for I have lived long enough.
This is the period of my ambition. O, this blessed
hour!

MISTRESS FORD  O, sweet Sir John!

FALSTAFF  Mistress Ford, I cannot cog. I cannot prate,
Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would
thy husband were dead. I'll speak it before the best
lord: I would make thee my lady.

MISTRESS FORD  I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be
a pitiful lady.

FALSTAFF  Let the court of France show me such
another. I see how thine eye would emulate the
diamond. Thou hast the right arched beauty of the
brow that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant,
or any tire of Venetian admittance.

MISTRESS FORD  A plain kerchief, Sir John. My brows
become nothing else, nor that well neither.

FALSTAFF  Thou art a tyrant to say so. Thou wouldst
make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of
thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait
in a semicircled farthingale. I see what thou wert,
if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend.
Come, thou canst not hide it.

MISTRESS FORD  Believe me, there's no such thing in
me.

FALSTAFF  What made me love thee? Let that persuade
thee. There's something extraordinary in thee.
Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and that
like a many of these lisping hawthorn buds that
come like women in men's apparel and smell like
Bucklersbury in simple time. I cannot. But I love
thee, none but thee; and thou deserv'st it.

MISTRESS FORD  Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love
Mistress Page.

FALSTAFF  Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by
the Counter gate, which is as hateful to me as the
reek of a lime-kiln.

MISTRESS FORD  Well, heaven knows how I love you,
and you shall one day find it.

FALSTAFF  Keep in that mind. I'll deserve it.

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, I must tell you, so you do, or else
I could not be in that mind.

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN  Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! Here's Mistress
Page at the door, sweating and blowing and looking
wildly, and would needs speak with you
presently.

FALSTAFF  She shall not see me. I will ensconce me behind
the arras.

MISTRESS FORD  Pray you, do so. She's a very tattling
woman.	[Falstaff stands behind the arras.]

[Enter Mistress Page.]

What's the matter? How now?

MISTRESS PAGE  O Mistress Ford, what have you done?
You're shamed, you're overthrown, you're undone
forever!

MISTRESS FORD  What's the matter, good Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE  O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an
honest man to your husband, to give him such
cause of suspicion!

MISTRESS FORD  What cause of suspicion?

MISTRESS PAGE  What cause of suspicion? Out upon you!
How am I mistook in you!

MISTRESS FORD  Why, alas, what's the matter?

MISTRESS PAGE  Your husband's coming hither, woman,
with all the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman
that he says is here now in the house, by
your consent, to take an ill advantage of his absence.
You are undone.

MISTRESS FORD  'Tis not so, I hope.

MISTRESS PAGE  Pray heaven it be not so, that you have
such a man here! But 'tis most certain your husband's
coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to
search for such a one. I come before to tell you. If
you know yourself clear, why, I am glad of it. But if
you have a friend here, convey, convey him out. Be
not amazed! Call all your senses to you; defend
your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life
forever.

MISTRESS FORD  What shall I do? There is a gentleman,
my dear friend; and I fear not mine own shame so
much as his peril. I had rather than a thousand
pound he were out of the house.

MISTRESS PAGE  For shame! Never stand "you had
rather" and "you had rather." Your husband's here
at hand. Bethink you of some conveyance. In the
house you cannot hide him. O, how have you deceived
me! Look, here is a basket. If he be of any
reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and
throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to
bucking. Or--it is whiting time--send him by your
two men to Datchet Mead.

MISTRESS FORD  He's too big to go in there. What shall I
do?	[Falstaff comes forward.]

FALSTAFF  Let me see 't, let me see 't! O, let me see 't! I'll
in, I'll in. Follow your friend's counsel. I'll in.

MISTRESS PAGE  What, Sir John Falstaff? [(Aside to
him.)] Are these your letters, knight?

FALSTAFF, [aside to Mistress Page]  I love thee. Help me
away. Let me creep in here. I'll never--

[Falstaff goes into the basket; they cover
him with dirty clothes.]



MISTRESS PAGE, [to Robin]  Help to cover your master,
boy.--Call your men, Mistress Ford.--You dissembling
knight!	[Robin exits.]

MISTRESS FORD  What, John! Robert! John!

[Enter Robert and John.]

Go, take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the
cowlstaff? Look how you drumble! Carry them to
the laundress in Datchet Mead. Quickly! Come.

[Enter Ford, Page, Doctor Caius,
and Sir Hugh Evans.]


FORD  Pray you, come near. If I suspect without cause,
why then make sport at me. Then let me be your
jest; I deserve it.--How now? Whither bear you
this?

ROBERT and JOHN  To the laundress, forsooth.

MISTRESS FORD  Why, what have you to do whither they
bear it? You were best meddle with buck-washing!

FORD  Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck.
Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck! I warrant you, buck,
and of the season too, it shall appear.
[Robert and John exit with the buck-basket.]
Gentlemen, I have dreamed tonight; I'll tell you my
dream. Here, here, here be my keys. Ascend my
chambers. Search, seek, find out. I'll warrant we'll
unkennel the fox. Let me stop this way first. [(He
locks the door.)] So, now uncape.

PAGE  Good Master Ford, be contented. You wrong
yourself too much.

FORD  True, Master Page.--Up, gentlemen. You shall
see sport anon. Follow me, gentlemen.	[He exits.]

SIR HUGH  This is fery fantastical humors and
jealousies.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France. It is
not jealous in France.

PAGE  Nay, follow him, gentlemen. See the issue of his
search.	[Page, Sir Hugh, and Caius exit.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Is there not a double excellency in this?

MISTRESS FORD  I know not which pleases me better--
that my husband is deceived, or Sir John.

MISTRESS PAGE  What a taking was he in when your
husband asked who was in the basket!

MISTRESS FORD  I am half afraid he will have need of
washing, so throwing him into the water will do
him a benefit.

MISTRESS PAGE  Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all
of the same strain were in the same distress.

MISTRESS FORD  I think my husband hath some special
suspicion of Falstaff's being here, for I never saw
him so gross in his jealousy till now.

MISTRESS PAGE  I will lay a plot to try that, and we will
yet have more tricks with Falstaff. His dissolute
disease will scarce obey this medicine.

MISTRESS FORD  Shall we send that foolish carrion Mistress
Quickly to him, and excuse his throwing into
the water, and give him another hope, to betray
him to another punishment?

MISTRESS PAGE  We will do it. Let him be sent for tomorrow
eight o'clock to have amends.

[Enter Ford, Page, Doctor Caius, and Sir Hugh.]


FORD  I cannot find him. Maybe the knave bragged of
that he could not compass.

MISTRESS PAGE, [aside to Mistress Ford]  Heard you
that?

MISTRESS FORD  You use me well, Master Ford, do you?

FORD  Ay, I do so.

MISTRESS FORD  Heaven make you better than your
thoughts!

FORD  Amen!

MISTRESS PAGE  You do yourself mighty wrong, Master
Ford.

FORD  Ay, ay. I must bear it.

SIR HUGH  If there be anypody in the house, and in the
chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses,
heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment!

DOCTOR CAIUS  Be gar, nor I too. There is nobodies.

PAGE  Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not ashamed?
What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination?
I would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the
wealth of Windsor Castle.

FORD  'Tis my fault, Master Page. I suffer for it.

SIR HUGH  You suffer for a pad conscience. Your wife is
as honest a 'omans as I will desires among five
thousand, and five hundred too.

DOCTOR CAIUS  By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.

FORD  Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come,
walk in the park. I pray you, pardon me. I will
hereafter make known to you why I have done
this.--Come, wife--come, Mistress Page, I pray
you, pardon me. Pray, heartily, pardon me.
[Mistress Page and Mistress Ford exit.]

PAGE, [to Caius and Sir Hugh]  Let's go in, gentlemen.
But, trust me, we'll mock him. [(To Ford, Caius,
and Sir Hugh.)] I do invite you tomorrow morning
to my house to breakfast. After, we'll a-birding together;
I have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be
so?

FORD  Anything.

SIR HUGH  If there is one, I shall make two in the
company.

DOCTOR CAIUS  If there be one or two, I shall make-a the
turd.

FORD  Pray you, go, Master Page.
[Ford and Page exit.]

SIR HUGH  I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on
the lousy knave mine Host.

DOCTOR CAIUS  Dat is good, by gar, with all my heart.

SIR HUGH  A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his
mockeries!
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Fenton and Anne Page.]


FENTON
I see I cannot get thy father's love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.

ANNE
Alas, how then?

FENTON  Why, thou must be thyself.
He doth object I am too great of birth,
And that, my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me--
My riots past, my wild societies--
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.

ANNE  Maybe he tells you true.

FENTON
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee, Anne,
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags.
And 'tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at.

ANNE  Gentle Master Fenton,
Yet seek my father's love, still seek it, sir.
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why then--hark you hither.
[They talk aside.]

[Enter Shallow, Slender, and Mistress Quickly.]


SHALLOW  Break their talk, Mistress Quickly. My kinsman
shall speak for himself.

SLENDER  I'll make a shaft or a bolt on 't. 'Slid, 'tis but
venturing.

SHALLOW  Be not dismayed.

SLENDER  No, she shall not dismay me. I care not for
that, but that I am afeard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [to Anne]  Hark ye, Master Slender
would speak a word with you.

ANNE
I come to him. [(Aside.)] This is my father's choice.
O, what a world of vile ill-favored faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!

MISTRESS QUICKLY  And how does good Master Fenton?
Pray you, a word with you.	[They talk aside.]

SHALLOW, [to Slender]  She's coming. To her, coz! O
boy, thou hadst a father!

SLENDER  I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can
tell you good jests of him.--Pray you, uncle, tell
Mistress Anne the jest how my father stole two
geese out of a pen, good uncle.

SHALLOW  Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.

SLENDER  Ay, that I do, as well as I love any woman in
Gloucestershire.

SHALLOW  He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.

SLENDER  Ay, that I will, come cut and longtail, under
the degree of a squire.

SHALLOW  He will make you a hundred and fifty
pounds jointure.

ANNE  Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.

SHALLOW  Marry, I thank you for it. I thank you for that
good comfort.--She calls you, coz. I'll leave you.
[He steps aside.]

ANNE  Now, Master Slender.

SLENDER  Now, good Mistress Anne.

ANNE  What is your will?

SLENDER  My will? 'Od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest
indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven. I
am not such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.

ANNE  I mean, Master Slender, what would you with
me?

SLENDER  Truly, for mine own part, I would little or
nothing with you. Your father and my uncle hath
made motions. If it be my luck, so; if not, happy
man be his dole. They can tell you how things go
better than I can. You may ask your father.

[Enter Page and Mistress Page.]

Here he comes.

PAGE
Now, Master Slender.--Love him, daughter Anne.--
Why, how now? What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.

FENTON
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.

MISTRESS PAGE
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.

PAGE  She is no match for you.

FENTON  Sir, will you hear me?

PAGE  No, good Master Fenton.--
Come Master Shallow.--Come, son Slender, in.--
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
[Page, Shallow, and Slender exit.]

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [to Fenton]  Speak to Mistress Page.

FENTON
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colors of my love
And not retire. Let me have your good will.

ANNE
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.

MISTRESS PAGE
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  That's my master, Master Doctor.

ANNE
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' th' earth
And bowled to death with turnips!

MISTRESS PAGE
Come, trouble not yourself.--Good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend nor enemy.
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then, farewell, sir. She must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.

FENTON
Farewell, gentle mistress.--Farewell, Nan.
[Mistress Page and Anne Page exit.]

MISTRESS QUICKLY  This is my doing now. "Nay," said I,
"will you cast away your child on a fool and a
physician? Look on Master Fenton." This is my
doing.

FENTON
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once tonight
Give my sweet Nan this ring. There's for thy pains.
[He gives her money and a ring.]

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Now heaven send thee good fortune.
[Fenton exits.]
A kind heart he hath. A woman would run through
fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I
would my master had Mistress Anne, or I would
Master Slender had her, or, in sooth, I would Master
Fenton had her. I will do what I can for them all
three; for so I have promised and I'll be as good as
my word--but speciously for Master Fenton. Well,
I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from
my two mistresses. What a beast am I to slack it!
[She exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  Bardolph, I say!

[Enter Bardolph.]


BARDOLPH  Here, sir.

FALSTAFF  Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in 't.
[Bardolph exits.]
Have I lived to be carried in a basket like a barrow
of butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the Thames?
Well, if I be served such another trick, I'll have my
brains ta'en out and buttered, and give them to a
dog for a New Year's gift. 'Sblood, the rogues
slighted me into the river with as little remorse as
they would have drowned a blind bitch's puppies,
fifteen i' th' litter! And you may know by my size
that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom
were as deep as hell, I should down. I had
been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and
shallow--a death that I abhor, for the water swells
a man, and what a thing should I have been when
I had been swelled! By the Lord, I should have
been a mountain of mummy.

[Enter Bardolph with cups of sack.]


BARDOLPH  Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with
you.

FALSTAFF  Come, let me pour in some sack to the
Thames water, for my belly's as cold as if I had
swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins. [He
drinks.] Call her in.

BARDOLPH  Come in, woman.

[Enter Mistress Quickly.]


MISTRESS QUICKLY  By your leave, I cry you mercy. Give
your Worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF, [to Bardolph]  Take away these chalices. Go
brew me a pottle of sack finely.

BARDOLPH  With eggs, sir?

FALSTAFF  Simple of itself. I'll no pullet sperm in my
brewage.	[Bardolph exits.]
How now?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Marry, sir, I come to your Worship
from Mistress Ford.

FALSTAFF  Mistress Ford? I have had ford enough. I
was thrown into the ford, I have my belly full of
ford.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Alas the day, good heart, that was
not her fault. She does so take on with her men;
they mistook their erection.

FALSTAFF  So did I mine, to build upon a foolish
woman's promise.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it
would yearn your heart to see it. Her husband goes
this morning a-birding; she desires you once more
to come to her, between eight and nine. I must
carry her word quickly. She'll make you amends, I
warrant you.

FALSTAFF  Well, I will visit her. Tell her so. And bid her
think what a man is. Let her consider his frailty,
and then judge of my merit.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  I will tell her.

FALSTAFF  Do so. Between nine and ten, say'st thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Eight and nine, sir.

FALSTAFF  Well, be gone. I will not miss her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Peace be with you, sir.
[Mistress Quickly exits.]

FALSTAFF  I marvel I hear not of Master Brook. He
sent me word to stay within. I like his money well.

[Enter Ford disguised as Brook.]

O, here he comes.

FORD, [as Brook]  God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF  Now, Master Brook, you come to know
what hath passed between me and Ford's wife.

FORD, [as Brook]  That indeed, Sir John, is my
business.

FALSTAFF  Master Brook, I will not lie to you. I was at
her house the hour she appointed me.

FORD, [as Brook]  And sped you, sir?

FALSTAFF  Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.

FORD, [as Brook]  How so, sir? Did she change her
determination?

FALSTAFF  No, Master Brook, but the peaking cornuto
her husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual
'larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of
our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed,
protested, and, as it were, spoke the prologue of
our comedy, and, at his heels, a rabble of his companions,
thither provoked and instigated by his
distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house for
his wife's love.

FORD, [as Brook]  What, while you were there?

FALSTAFF  While I was there.

FORD, [as Brook]  And did he search for you and could
not find you?

FALSTAFF  You shall hear. As good luck would have it,
comes in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of
Ford's approach, and, in her invention and Ford's
wife's distraction, they conveyed me into a
buck-basket.

FORD, [as Brook]  A buck-basket!

FALSTAFF  By the Lord, a buck-basket! Rammed me
in with foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings,
greasy napkins, that, Master Brook, there
was the rankest compound of villainous smell that
ever offended nostril.

FORD, [as Brook]  And how long lay you there?

FALSTAFF  Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I
have suffered to bring this woman to evil for your
good. Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple
of Ford's knaves, his hinds, were called forth by
their mistress to carry me in the name of foul
clothes to Datchet Lane. They took me on their
shoulders, met the jealous knave their master in
the door, who asked them once or twice what they
had in their basket. I quaked for fear lest the lunatic
knave would have searched it, but fate, ordaining
he should be a cuckold, held his hand.
Well, on went he for a search, and away went I for
foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master Brook.
I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first,
an intolerable fright to be detected with a jealous
rotten bellwether; next, to be compassed, like a
good bilbo, in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in, like
a strong distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted
in their own grease. Think of that, a man of my
kidney--think of that--that am as subject to heat
as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw.
It was a miracle to 'scape suffocation. And in
the height of this bath, when I was more than half-stewed
in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be thrown
into the Thames and cooled, glowing hot, in that
surge, like a horseshoe! Think of that--hissing
hot--think of that, Master Brook.

FORD, [as Brook]  In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that
for my sake you have suffered all this. My suit,
then, is desperate. You'll undertake her no more?

FALSTAFF  Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna,
as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave her
thus. Her husband is this morning gone a-birding.
I have received from her another embassy of meeting.
'Twixt eight and nine is the hour, Master
Brook.

FORD, [as Brook]  'Tis past eight already, sir.

FALSTAFF  Is it? I will then address me to my appointment.
Come to me at your convenient leisure,
and you shall know how I speed; and the conclusion
shall be crowned with your enjoying her.
Adieu. You shall have her, Master Brook. Master
Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.	[Falstaff exits.]

FORD  Hum! Ha! Is this a vision? Is this a dream? Do I
sleep? Master Ford, awake! Awake, Master Ford!
There's a hole made in your best coat, Master
Ford. This 'tis to be married; this 'tis to have linen
and buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself
what I am. I will now take the lecher. He is at my
house. He cannot 'scape me. 'Tis impossible he
should. He cannot creep into a half-penny purse,
nor into a pepper-box. But lest the devil that
guides him should aid him, I will search impossible
places. Though what I am I cannot avoid, yet to
be what I would not shall not make me tame. If I
have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go
with me: I'll be horn-mad.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Quickly, and William.]


MISTRESS PAGE  Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st
thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Sure he is by this, or will be presently.
But truly he is very courageous mad about
his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires
you to come suddenly.

MISTRESS PAGE  I'll be with her by and by. I'll but bring
my young man here to school.

[Enter Sir Hugh Evans.]

Look where his master comes. 'Tis a playing day, I
see.--How now, Sir Hugh, no school today?

SIR HUGH  No. Master Slender is let the boys leave to
play.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Blessing of his heart!

MISTRESS PAGE  Sir Hugh, my husband says my son
profits nothing in the world at his book. I pray you,
ask him some questions in his accidence.

SIR HUGH  Come hither, William. Hold up your head.
Come.

MISTRESS PAGE  Come on, sirrah. Hold up your head.
Answer your master. Be not afraid.

SIR HUGH  William, how many numbers is in nouns?

WILLIAM  Two.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Truly, I thought there had been one
number more, because they say " 'Od's nouns."

SIR HUGH  Peace your tattlings!--What is "fair,"
William?

WILLIAM  Pulcher.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Polecats? There are fairer things
than polecats, sure.

SIR HUGH  You are a very simplicity 'oman. I pray you,
peace.--What is lapis, William?

WILLIAM  A stone.

SIR HUGH  And what is "a stone," William?

WILLIAM  A pebble.

SIR HUGH  No. It is lapis. I pray you, remember in your
prain.

WILLIAM  Lapis.

SIR HUGH  That is a good William. What is he, William,
that does lend articles?

WILLIAM  Articles are borrowed of the pronoun and be
thus declined: singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec,
hoc.

SIR HUGH  Nominativo, hig, haeg, hog. Pray you, mark:
genitivo, huius. Well, what is your accusative case?

WILLIAM  Accusativo, hinc.

SIR HUGH  I pray you, have your remembrance, child.
Accusativo, hung, hang, hog.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  "Hang-hog" is Latin for bacon, I
warrant you.

SIR HUGH  Leave your prabbles, 'oman.--What is the
focative case, William?

WILLIAM  O--vocativo--O--

SIR HUGH  Remember, William, focative is caret.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  And that's a good root.

SIR HUGH  'Oman, forbear.

MISTRESS PAGE, [to Mistress Quickly]  Peace!

SIR HUGH  What is your genitive case plural, William?

WILLIAM  Genitive case?

SIR HUGH  Ay.

WILLIAM  Genitive: horum, harum, horum.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Vengeance of Ginny's case! Fie on
her! Never name her, child, if she be a whore.

SIR HUGH  For shame, 'oman!

MISTRESS QUICKLY  You do ill to teach the child such
words.--He teaches him to hick and to hack,
which they'll do fast enough of themselves, and to
call "whorum."--Fie upon you!

SIR HUGH  'Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings
for thy cases and the numbers of the
genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as
I would desires.

MISTRESS PAGE, [to Mistress Quickly]  Prithee, hold thy
peace.

SIR HUGH  Show me now, William, some declensions of
your pronouns.

WILLIAM  Forsooth, I have forgot.

SIR HUGH  It is qui, quae, quod. If you forget your qui's,
your quae's, and your quod's, you must be
preeches. Go your ways and play, go.

MISTRESS PAGE  He is a better scholar than I thought he
was.

SIR HUGH  He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress
Page.

MISTRESS PAGE  Adieu, good Sir Hugh.--Get you home,
boy. [(To Mistress Quickly.)] Come. We stay too
long.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff and Mistress Ford.]


FALSTAFF  Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up
my sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your
love, and I profess requital to a hair's breadth, not
only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love,
but in all the accoutrement, compliment, and ceremony
of it. But are you sure of your husband now?

MISTRESS FORD  He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.

MISTRESS PAGE, [within]  What ho, gossip Ford! What
ho!

MISTRESS FORD  Step into th' chamber, Sir John.
[Falstaff exits.]

[Enter Mistress Page.]


MISTRESS PAGE  How now, sweetheart, who's at home
besides yourself?

MISTRESS FORD  Why, none but mine own people.

MISTRESS PAGE  Indeed?

MISTRESS FORD  No, certainly. [Aside to her.] Speak
louder.

MISTRESS PAGE  Truly, I am so glad you have nobody
here.

MISTRESS FORD  Why?

MISTRESS PAGE  Why, woman, your husband is in his
old lunes again. He so takes on yonder with my
husband, so rails against all married mankind, so
curses all Eve's daughters of what complexion soever,
and so buffets himself on the forehead, crying
"Peer out, peer out!" that any madness I ever yet
beheld seemed but tameness, civility, and patience
to this his distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat
knight is not here.

MISTRESS FORD  Why, does he talk of him?

MISTRESS PAGE  Of none but him, and swears he was
carried out, the last time he searched for him, in a
basket; protests to my husband he is now here;
and hath drawn him and the rest of their company
from their sport to make another experiment of
his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is not here.
Now he shall see his own foolery.

MISTRESS FORD  How near is he, Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE  Hard by, at street end. He will be here
anon.

MISTRESS FORD  I am undone! The knight is here.

MISTRESS PAGE  Why then, you are utterly shamed, and
he's but a dead man. What a woman are you! Away
with him, away with him! Better shame than
murder.

MISTRESS FORD  Which way should he go? How should
I bestow him? Shall I put him into the basket
again?

[Enter Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  No, I'll come no more i' th' basket. May I not
go out ere he come?

MISTRESS PAGE  Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers
watch the door with pistols, that none shall issue
out. Otherwise you might slip away ere he came.
But what make you here?

FALSTAFF  What shall I do? I'll creep up into the
chimney.

MISTRESS FORD  There they always use to discharge
their birding pieces.

MISTRESS PAGE  Creep into the kiln-hole.

FALSTAFF  Where is it?

MISTRESS FORD  He will seek there, on my word. Neither
press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he
hath an abstract for the remembrance of such
places, and goes to them by his note. There is no
hiding you in the house.

FALSTAFF  I'll go out, then.

MISTRESS PAGE  If you go out in your own semblance,
you die, Sir John--unless you go out disguised.

MISTRESS FORD  How might we disguise him?

MISTRESS PAGE  Alas the day, I know not. There is no
woman's gown big enough for him; otherwise he
might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and
so escape.

FALSTAFF  Good hearts, devise something. Any extremity
rather than a mischief.

MISTRESS FORD  My maid's aunt, the fat woman of
Brentford, has a gown above.

MISTRESS PAGE  On my word, it will serve him. She's as
big as he is. And there's her thrummed hat and her
muffler too.--Run up, Sir John.

MISTRESS FORD  Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page
and I will look some linen for your head.

MISTRESS PAGE  Quick, quick! We'll come dress you
straight. Put on the gown the while.
[Falstaff exits.]

MISTRESS FORD  I would my husband would meet him
in this shape. He cannot abide the old woman of
Brentford. He swears she's a witch, forbade her my
house, and hath threatened to beat her.

MISTRESS PAGE  Heaven guide him to thy husband's
cudgel, and the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!

MISTRESS FORD  But is my husband coming?

MISTRESS PAGE  Ay, in good sadness is he, and talks of
the basket too, howsoever he hath had
intelligence.

MISTRESS FORD  We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men
to carry the basket again, to meet him at the door
with it as they did last time.

MISTRESS PAGE  Nay, but he'll be here presently. Let's go
dress him like the witch of Brentford.

MISTRESS FORD  I'll first direct my men what they shall
do with the basket. Go up. I'll bring linen for him
straight.	[She exits.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Hang him, dishonest varlet! We cannot
misuse him enough.
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
'Tis old but true: "Still swine eats all the draff."
[She exits.]

[Enter Mistress Ford with Robert and John,
who bring the buck-basket.]


MISTRESS FORD  Go, sirs, take the basket again on your
shoulders. Your master is hard at door. If he bid
you set it down, obey him. Quickly, dispatch.
[She exits.]

ROBERT  Come, come, take it up.

JOHN  Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.

ROBERT  I hope not. I had lief as bear so much lead.
[They pick up the basket.]

[Enter Ford, Page, Doctor Caius, Sir Hugh
Evans, and Shallow.]


FORD  Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you
any way then to unfool me again?--Set down the
basket, villain. [They put the basket down.] Somebody
call my wife. Youth in a basket! O, you panderly
rascals! There's a knot, a gang, a pack, a
conspiracy against me. Now shall the devil be
shamed.--What, wife, I say! Come, come forth!
Behold what honest clothes you send forth to
bleaching!

PAGE  Why, this passes, Master Ford! You are not to go
loose any longer; you must be pinioned.

SIR HUGH  Why, this is lunatics. This is mad as a mad
dog.

SHALLOW  Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.

FORD  So say I too, sir.

[Enter Mistress Ford.]

Come hither, Mistress Ford.--Mistress Ford, the
honest woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature,
that hath the jealous fool to her husband!--I
suspect without cause, mistress, do I?

MISTRESS FORD  Heaven be my witness you do, if you
suspect me in any dishonesty.

FORD  Well said, brazen-face. Hold it out.--Come
forth, sirrah.	[He pulls clothes out of the basket.]

PAGE  This passes.

MISTRESS FORD  Are you not ashamed? Let the clothes
alone.

FORD  I shall find you anon.

SIR HUGH  'Tis unreasonable. Will you take up your
wife's clothes? Come, away.

FORD, [to the Servants]  Empty the basket, I say.

MISTRESS FORD  Why, man, why?

FORD  Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed
out of my house yesterday in this basket.
Why may not he be there again? In my house I am
sure he is. My intelligence is true, my jealousy is
reasonable.--Pluck me out all the linen.

MISTRESS FORD  If you find a man there, he shall die a
flea's death.	[Robert and John empty the basket.]

PAGE  Here's no man.

SHALLOW  By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford.
This wrongs you.

SIR HUGH  Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow
the imaginations of your own heart. This is
jealousies.

FORD  Well, he's not here I seek for.

PAGE  No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.

FORD  Help to search my house this one time. If I find
not what I seek, show no color for my extremity.
Let me forever be your table-sport. Let them say of
me "As jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow
walnut for his wife's leman." Satisfy me once
more. Once more search with me.
[Robert and John refill the basket and carry it off.]

MISTRESS FORD, [calling offstage]  What ho, Mistress
Page! Come you and the old woman down. My
husband will come into the chamber.

FORD  "Old woman"? What old woman's that?

MISTRESS FORD  Why, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.

FORD  A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have
I not forbid her my house? She comes of errands,
does she? We are simple men; we do not know
what's brought to pass under the profession of
fortune-telling. She works by charms, by spells, by
th' figure, and such daubery as this is, beyond our
element. We know nothing.-- Come down, you
witch, you hag, you! Come down, I say!
[Ford seizes a cudgel.]

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, good sweet husband!--Good gentlemen,
let him not strike the old woman.

[Enter Mistress Page and Sir John Falstaff disguised
as an old woman.]


MISTRESS PAGE  Come, Mother Pratt; come, give me
your hand.

FORD  I'll pratt her. [(He beats Falstaff.)] Out of my
door, you witch, you rag, you baggage, you polecat,
you runnion! Out, out! I'll conjure you, I'll
fortune-tell you!	[Falstaff exits.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Are you not ashamed? I think you have
killed the poor woman.

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, he will do it.--'Tis a goodly credit
for you.

FORD  Hang her, witch!

SIR HUGH  By yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witch
indeed. I like not when a 'oman has a great peard.
I spy a great peard under her muffler.

FORD  Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow.
See but the issue of my jealousy. If I cry out
thus upon no trail, never trust me when I open
again.

PAGE  Let's obey his humor a little further. Come,
gentlemen.
[Ford, Page, Caius, Sir Hugh, and Shallow exit.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.

MISTRESS FORD  Nay, by th' Mass, that he did not; he
beat him most unpitifully, methought.

MISTRESS PAGE  I'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung
o'er the altar. It hath done meritorious service.

MISTRESS FORD  What think you? May we, with the
warrant of womanhood and the witness of a good
conscience, pursue him with any further revenge?

MISTRESS PAGE  The spirit of wantonness is, sure,
scared out of him. If the devil have him not in fee
simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, I
think, in the way of waste, attempt us again.

MISTRESS FORD  Shall we tell our husbands how we
have served him?

MISTRESS PAGE  Yes, by all means--if it be but to scrape
the figures out of your husband's brains. If they
can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous fat
knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will
still be the ministers.

MISTRESS FORD  I'll warrant they'll have him publicly
shamed, and methinks there would be no period to
the jest should he not be publicly shamed.

MISTRESS PAGE  Come, to the forge with it, then shape
it. I would not have things cool.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Host and Bardolph.]


BARDOLPH  Sir, the Germans desire to have three of
your horses. The Duke himself will be tomorrow at
court, and they are going to meet him.

HOST  What duke should that be comes so secretly? I
hear not of him in the court. Let me speak with the
gentlemen. They speak English?

BARDOLPH  Ay, sir. I'll call them to you.

HOST  They shall have my horses, but I'll make them
pay. I'll sauce them. They have had my house a
week at command; I have turned away my other
guests. They must come off. I'll sauce them. Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Page, Ford, Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, and
Sir Hugh Evans.]


SIR HUGH  'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman as
ever I did look upon.

PAGE  And did he send you both these letters at an
instant?

MISTRESS PAGE  Within a quarter of an hour.

FORD
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt.
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honor
stand,
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.

PAGE  'Tis well, 'tis well. No more.
Be not as extreme in submission as in offense.
But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.

FORD
There is no better way than that they spoke of.

PAGE  How, to send him word they'll meet him in the
park at midnight? Fie, fie, he'll never come.

SIR HUGH  You say he has been thrown in the rivers
and has been grievously peaten as an old 'oman.
Methinks there should be terrors in him, that he
should not come. Methinks his flesh is punished;
he shall have no desires.

PAGE  So think I too.

MISTRESS FORD
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.

MISTRESS PAGE
There is an old tale goes that Herne the Hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the wintertime, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a
chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter for a truth.

PAGE
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak.
But what of this?

MISTRESS FORD  Marry, this is our device,
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.

PAGE
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come.
And in this shape when you have brought him
thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

MISTRESS PAGE
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth we'll dress
Like urchins, aufs, and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands. Upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song. Upon their sight,
We two in great amazedness will fly.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And, fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.

FORD  And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.

MISTRESS PAGE  The truth being known,
We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.

FORD  The children must
Be practiced well to this, or they'll ne'er do 't.

SIR HUGH  I will teach the children their behaviors, and
I will be like a jackanapes also, to burn the knight
with my taber.

FORD  That will be excellent. I'll go buy them vizards.

MISTRESS PAGE
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.

PAGE
That silk will I go buy. [(Aside.)] And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton.--Go, send to Falstaff
straight.

FORD
Nay, I'll to him again in name of Brook.
He'll tell me all his purpose. Sure he'll come.

MISTRESS PAGE
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.

SIR HUGH  Let us about it. It is admirable pleasures and
fery honest knaveries.
[Page, Ford, and Sir Hugh exit.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Go, Mistress Ford,
Send quickly to Sir John to know his mind.
[Mistress Ford exits.]
I'll to the doctor. He hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well-landed, is an idiot,
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well-moneyed, and his friends
Potent at court. He, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
[She exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Host and Simple.]


HOST  What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thickskin?
Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick,
snap.

SIMPLE  Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff
from Master Slender.

HOST  There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
standing-bed and truckle-bed. 'Tis painted about
with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go,
knock and call. He'll speak like an Anthropophaginian
unto thee. Knock, I say.

SIMPLE  There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up
into his chamber. I'll be so bold as stay, sir, till she
come down. I come to speak with her, indeed.

HOST  Ha? A fat woman? The knight may be robbed.
I'll call.--Bully knight! Bully Sir John! Speak from
thy lungs military. Art thou there? It is thine Host,
thine Ephesian, calls.

FALSTAFF, [within]  How now, mine Host?

HOST  Here's a Bohemian Tartar tarries the coming
down of thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let
her descend. My chambers are honorable. Fie! Privacy?
Fie!

[Enter Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  There was, mine Host, an old fat woman
even now with me, but she's gone.

SIMPLE  Pray you, sir, was 't not the wise woman of
Brentford?

FALSTAFF  Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell. What would
you with her?

SIMPLE  My master, sir, my Master Slender, sent to her,
seeing her go through the streets, to know, sir,
whether one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a chain,
had the chain or no.

FALSTAFF  I spake with the old woman about it.

SIMPLE  And what says she, I pray, sir?

FALSTAFF  Marry, she says that the very same man that
beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him
of it.

SIMPLE  I would I could have spoken with the woman
herself. I had other things to have spoken with her
too from him.

FALSTAFF  What are they? Let us know.

HOST  Ay, come. Quick!

SIMPLE  I may not conceal them, sir.

HOST  Conceal them, or thou diest.

SIMPLE  Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress
Anne Page, to know if it were my master's fortune
to have her or no.

FALSTAFF  'Tis; 'tis his fortune.

SIMPLE  What, sir?

FALSTAFF  To have her or no. Go. Say the woman told
me so.

SIMPLE  May I be bold to say so, sir?

FALSTAFF  Ay, sir; like who more bold.

SIMPLE  I thank your Worship. I shall make my master
glad with these tidings.	[He exits.]

HOST  Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
there a wise woman with thee?

FALSTAFF  Ay, that there was, mine Host, one that hath
taught me more wit than ever I learned before in
my life. And I paid nothing for it neither, but was
paid for my learning.

[Enter Bardolph.]


BARDOLPH, [to Host]  Out, alas, sir, cozenage, mere
cozenage!

HOST  Where be my horses? Speak well of them,
varletto.

BARDOLPH  Run away with the cozeners. For so soon as
I came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind
one of them in a slough of mire, and set
spurs, and away, like three German devils, three
Doctor Faustuses.

HOST  They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain. Do
not say they be fled. Germans are honest men.

[Enter Sir Hugh Evans.]


SIR HUGH  Where is mine Host?

HOST  What is the matter, sir?

SIR HUGH  Have a care of your entertainments. There is
a friend of mine come to town tells me there is
three cozen-Germans that has cozened all the
hosts of Readings, of Maidenhead, of Colnbrook,
of horses and money. I tell you for good will, look
you. You are wise, and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks,
and 'tis not convenient you should be cozened.
Fare you well.	[He exits.]

[Enter Doctor Caius.]


DOCTOR CAIUS  Vere is mine Host de Jarteer?

HOST  Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful
dilemma.

DOCTOR CAIUS  I cannot tell vat is dat. But it is tell-a me
dat you make grand preparation for a duke de
Jamanie. By my trot, dere is no duke that the court
is know to come. I tell you for good will. Adieu.
[He exits.]

HOST, [to Bardolph]  Hue and cry, villain, go!--Assist
me, knight. I am undone.--Fly, run; hue and cry,
villain! I am undone.	[Host and Bardolph exit.]

FALSTAFF  I would all the world might be cozened, for I
have been cozened and beaten too. If it should
come to the ear of the court how I have been transformed,
and how my transformation hath been
washed and cudgeled, they would melt me out of
my fat drop by drop, and liquor fishermen's boots
with me. I warrant they would whip me with their
fine wits till I were as crestfallen as a dried pear. I
never prospered since I forswore myself at
primero. Well, if my wind were but long enough, I
would repent.

[Enter Mistress Quickly.]

Now, whence come you?

MISTRESS QUICKLY  From the two parties, forsooth.

FALSTAFF  The devil take one party, and his dam the
other, and so they shall be both bestowed. I have
suffered more for their sakes, more than the villainous
inconstancy of man's disposition is able to
bear.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  And have not they suffered? Yes, I
warrant, speciously one of them. Mistress Ford,
good heart, is beaten black and blue that you cannot
see a white spot about her.

FALSTAFF  What tell'st thou me of black and blue? I was
beaten myself into all the colors of the rainbow,
and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of
Brentford. But that my admirable dexterity of wit,
my counterfeiting the action of an old woman, delivered
me, the knave constable had set me i' th'
stocks, i' th' common stocks, for a witch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  Sir, let me speak with you in your
chamber. You shall hear how things go, and, I warrant,
to your content. Here is a letter will say
somewhat. [She gives him a paper.] Good hearts,
what ado here is to bring you together! Sure, one
of you does not serve heaven well, that you are so
crossed.

FALSTAFF  Come up into my chamber.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Fenton and Host.]


HOST  Master Fenton, talk not to me. My mind is
heavy. I will give over all.

FENTON
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.

HOST  I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will, at the
least, keep your counsel.

FENTON
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath answered my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish. I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at,
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
That neither singly can be manifested
Without the show of both. Fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene; the image of the jest
I'll show you here at large. [He shows the Host a
paper.] Hark, good mine Host:
Tonight at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen--
The purpose why is here--in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry. She hath consented. Now, sir,
Her mother, ever strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the dean'ry, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her. To this her mother's plot
She, seemingly obedient, likewise hath
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white,
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him. Her mother hath intended
The better to denote her to the doctor--
For they must all be masked and vizarded--
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribbons pendent flaring 'bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token
The maid hath given consent to go with him.

HOST
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?

FENTON
Both, my good Host, to go along with me.
And here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.

HOST
Well, husband your device. I'll to the vicar.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.

FENTON
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I'll make a present recompense.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff and Mistress Quickly.]


FALSTAFF  Prithee, no more prattling. Go. I'll hold. This
is the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.
Away, go. They say there is divinity in odd
numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death.
Away.

MISTRESS QUICKLY  I'll provide you a chain, and I'll do
what I can to get you a pair of horns.

FALSTAFF  Away, I say! Time wears. Hold up your head,
and mince.	[Mistress Quickly exits.]

[Enter Ford disguised as Brook.]

How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the
matter will be known tonight or never. Be you in
the park about midnight, at Herne's oak, and you
shall see wonders.

FORD, [as Brook]  Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as
you told me you had appointed?

FALSTAFF  I went to her, Master Brook, as you see,
like a poor old man, but I came from her, Master
Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave
Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of
jealousy in him, Master Brook, that ever governed
frenzy. I will tell you, he beat me grievously,
in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man,
Master Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver's
beam, because I know also life is a shuttle. I am in
haste. Go along with me; I'll tell you all, Master
Brook. Since I plucked geese, played truant, and
whipped top, I knew not what 'twas to be beaten
till lately. Follow me. I'll tell you strange things of
this knave Ford, on whom tonight I will be revenged,
and I will deliver his wife into your hand.
Follow. Strange things in hand, Master Brook!
Follow.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Page, Shallow, and Slender.]


PAGE  Come, come. We'll couch i' th' castle ditch till we
see the light of our fairies.--Remember, son Slender,
my--

SLENDER  Ay, forsooth, I have spoke with her, and we
have a nayword how to know one another. I come
to her in white and cry "mum," she cries "budget,"
and by that we know one another.

SHALLOW  That's good too. But what needs either your
"mum" or her "budget"? The white will decipher
her well enough. It hath struck ten o'clock.

PAGE  The night is dark. Light and spirits will become
it well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means
evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his
horns. Let's away. Follow me.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, and Doctor Caius.]


MISTRESS PAGE  Master Doctor, my daughter is in
green. When you see your time, take her by the
hand; away with her to the deanery, and dispatch
it quickly. Go before into the park. We two must go
together.

DOCTOR CAIUS  I know vat I have to do. Adieu.

MISTRESS PAGE  Fare you well, sir.	[Caius exits.]
My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse
of Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying
my daughter. But 'tis no matter. Better a little chiding
than a great deal of heartbreak.

MISTRESS FORD  Where is Nan now, and her troop of
fairies, and the Welsh devil Hugh?

MISTRESS PAGE  They are all couched in a pit hard by
Herne's oak, with obscured lights, which, at the
very instant of Falstaff's and our meeting, they will
at once display to the night.

MISTRESS FORD  That cannot choose but amaze him.

MISTRESS PAGE  If he be not amazed, he will be
mocked. If he be amazed, he will every way be
mocked.

MISTRESS FORD  We'll betray him finely.

MISTRESS PAGE
Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
Those that betray them do no treachery.

MISTRESS FORD  The hour draws on. To the oak, to the
oak!
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Sir Hugh Evans and boys disguised,
like him, as Fairies.]


SIR HUGH  Trib, trib, fairies! Come, and remember
your parts. Be pold, I pray you. Follow me into the
pit, and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid
you. Come, come; trib, trib.	[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff wearing a buck's head.]


FALSTAFF  The Windsor bell hath struck twelve. The
minute draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods assist
me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy
Europa; love set on thy horns. O powerful love,
that in some respects makes a beast a man, in
some other a man a beast! You were also, Jupiter,
a swan for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love,
how near the god drew to the complexion of a
goose! A fault done first in the form of a beast; O
Jove, a beastly fault! And then another fault in the
semblance of a fowl; think on 't, Jove, a foul fault.
When gods have hot backs, what shall poor men
do? For me, I am here a Windsor stag, and the fattest,
I think, i' th' forest. Send me a cool rut-time,
Jove, or who can blame me to piss my tallow?

[Enter Mistress Page and Mistress Ford.]

Who comes here? My doe?

MISTRESS FORD  Sir John? Art thou there, my deer, my
male deer?

FALSTAFF  My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
potatoes, let it thunder to the tune of "Greensleeves,"
hail kissing-comfits, and snow eryngoes; let there
come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me
here.	[He embraces her.]

MISTRESS FORD  Mistress Page is come with me,
sweetheart.

FALSTAFF  Divide me like a bribed buck, each a haunch.
I will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for
the fellow of this walk, and my horns I bequeath
your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like
Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of
conscience; he makes restitution. As I am a true
spirit, welcome.	[A noise of horns within.]

MISTRESS PAGE  Alas, what noise?

MISTRESS FORD  Heaven forgive our sins!

FALSTAFF  What should this be?

MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE  Away, away.
[The two women run off.]

FALSTAFF  I think the devil will not have me damned,
lest the oil that's in me should set hell on fire. He
would never else cross me thus.

[Enter Mistress Quickly, Pistol, Sir Hugh Evans,
Anne Page and boys, all disguised as Fairies and
carrying tapers.]


MISTRESS QUICKLY, [as Fairy Queen]
Fairies black, gray, green, and white,
You moonshine revelers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.

PISTOL, [as Hobgoblin]
Elves, list your names. Silence, you airy toys!--
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap,
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths
unswept.
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry.
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.

FALSTAFF, [aside]
They are fairies. He that speaks to them shall die.
I'll wink and couch. No man their works must eye.
[He crouches down and covers his eyes.]

SIR HUGH, [as a fairy]
Where's Bead? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy.
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and
shins.

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [as Fairy Queen]  About, about!
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out.
Strew good luck, aufs, on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower.
Each fair installment, coat, and sev'ral crest
With loyal blazon evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring.
Th' expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And Honi soit qui mal y pense write
In em'rald tufts, flowers purple, blue, and white,
Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee.
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away, disperse! But till 'tis one o'clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the Hunter let us not forget.

SIR HUGH, [as a fairy]
Pray you, lock hand in hand. Yourselves in order set;
And twenty glowworms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But stay! I smell a man of Middle Earth.

FALSTAFF, [aside]  Heavens defend me from that Welsh
fairy, lest he transform me to a piece of cheese.

PISTOL, [as Hobgoblin, to Falstaff]
Vile worm, thou wast o'erlooked even in thy birth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [as Fairy Queen, to Sir Hugh]
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end.
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain. But if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

PISTOL, [as Hobgoblin]
A trial, come!

SIR HUGH, [as a fairy]  Come, will this wood take fire?
[Sir Hugh puts a taper to Falstaff's finger, and he starts.]

FALSTAFF  O, O, O!

MISTRESS QUICKLY, [as Fairy Queen]
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies. Sing a scornful rhyme,
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

[Here they pinch him and sing about him, and Doctor
Caius comes one way and steals away a boy in white.
And Slender comes another way; he takes a boy in
green. And Fenton steals Mistress Anne Page.]


FAIRIES [sing]
	Fie on sinful fantasy!
	Fie on lust and luxury!
	Lust is but a bloody fire
	Kindled with unchaste desire,
	Fed in heart whose flames aspire
	As thoughts do blow them higher and higher.
	Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
	Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him and burn him and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.

[A noise of hunting is made within, and all the fairies
run away from Falstaff, who pulls off his buck's head
and rises up. Enter Page, Mistress Page,
Mistress Ford and Ford.]


PAGE, [to Falstaff]
Nay, do not fly. I think we have watched you now.
Will none but Herne the Hunter serve your turn?

MISTRESS PAGE
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.--
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
[She points to the horns.]
See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?

FORD, [to Falstaff]  Now, sir, who's a cuckold now?
Master Brook, Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly
knave. Here are his horns, Master Brook. And,
Master Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's
but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty
pounds of money, which must be paid to Master
Brook. His horses are arrested for it, Master
Brook.

MISTRESS FORD  Sir John, we have had ill luck. We
could never meet. I will never take you for my love
again, but I will always count you my deer.

FALSTAFF  I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.

FORD  Ay, and an ox too. Both the proofs are extant.

FALSTAFF  And these are not fairies. I was three or four
times in the thought they were not fairies; and yet
the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of
my powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into
a received belief, in despite of the teeth of all
rhyme and reason, that they were fairies. See now
how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent when 'tis upon
ill employment.

SIR HUGH  Sir John Falstaff, serve Got and leave your
desires, and fairies will not pinse you.

FORD  Well said, Fairy Hugh.

SIR HUGH  And leave you your jealousies too, I pray
you.

FORD  I will never mistrust my wife again till thou art
able to woo her in good English.

FALSTAFF  Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it,
that it wants matter to prevent so gross o'erreaching
as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too?
Shall I have a coxcomb of frieze? 'Tis time I were
choked with a piece of toasted cheese.

SIR HUGH  Seese is not good to give putter. Your belly is
all putter.

FALSTAFF  "Seese" and "putter"? Have I lived to stand at
the taunt of one that makes fritters of English?
This is enough to be the decay of lust and late
walking through the realm.

MISTRESS PAGE  Why, Sir John, do you think though we
would have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the
head and shoulders, and have given ourselves
without scruple to hell, that ever the devil could
have made you our delight?

FORD  What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?

MISTRESS PAGE  A puffed man?

PAGE  Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?

FORD  And one that is as slanderous as Satan?

PAGE  And as poor as Job?

FORD  And as wicked as his wife?

SIR HUGH  And given to fornications, and to taverns,
and sack, and wine, and metheglins, and to drinkings
and swearings and starings, pribbles and
prabbles?

FALSTAFF  Well, I am your theme. You have the start of
me. I am dejected. I am not able to answer the
Welsh flannel. Ignorance itself is a plummet o'er
me. Use me as you will.

FORD  Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor to one
Master Brook, that you have cozened of money,
to whom you should have been a pander. Over and
above that you have suffered, I think to repay that
money will be a biting affliction.

PAGE  Yet be cheerful, knight. Thou shalt eat a posset
tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to
laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee. Tell her
Master Slender hath married her daughter.

MISTRESS PAGE, [aside]  Doctors doubt that. If Anne
Page be my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius'
wife.

[Enter Slender.]


SLENDER  Whoa, ho, ho, Father Page!

PAGE  Son, how now! How now, son! Have you
dispatched?

SLENDER  "Dispatched"? I'll make the best in Gloucestershire
know on 't. Would I were hanged, la, else!

PAGE  Of what, son?

SLENDER  I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress
Anne Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had
not been i' th' church, I would have swinged him,
or he should have swinged me. If I did not think it
had been Anne Page, would I might never stir! And
'tis a post-master's boy.

PAGE  Upon my life, then, you took the wrong--

SLENDER  What need you tell me that? I think so, when
I took a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him,
for all he was in woman's apparel, I would not
have had him.

PAGE  Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you
how you should know my daughter by her
garments?

SLENDER  I went to her in white, and cried "mum,"
and she cried "budget," as Anne and I had appointed,
and yet it was not Anne, but a post-master's
boy.

MISTRESS PAGE  Good George, be not angry. I knew of
your purpose, turned my daughter into green,
and indeed she is now with the doctor at the deanery,
and there married.

[Enter Doctor Caius.]


DOCTOR CAIUS  Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened!
I ha' married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by
gar, a boy. It is not Anne Page. By gar, I am
cozened.

MISTRESS PAGE  Why? Did you take her in green?

DOCTOR CAIUS  Ay, be gar, and 'tis a boy. Be gar, I'll raise
all Windsor.

FORD  This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?

[Enter Fenton and Anne Page.]


PAGE  My heart misgives me. Here comes Master Fenton.--
How now, Master Fenton!

ANNE  Pardon, good father. Good my mother, pardon.

PAGE  Now, mistress, how chance you went not with
Master Slender?

MISTRESS PAGE
Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?

FENTON
You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
Th' offense is holy that she hath committed,
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.

FORD, [to Page and Mistress Page]
Stand not amazed. Here is no remedy.
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state.
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.

FALSTAFF  I am glad, though you have ta'en a special
stand to strike at me, that your arrow hath
glanced.

PAGE
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy.
What cannot be eschewed must be embraced.

FALSTAFF
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.

MISTRESS PAGE
Well, I will muse no further.--Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days.--
Good husband, let us every one go home
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire--
Sir John and all.

FORD  Let it be so, Sir John.
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word,
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
[They exit.]

Timon of Athens
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/timon-of-athens/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
TIMON, a noble Athenian
FLAVIUS, his steward
Servants of Timon:
  LUCILIUS
  FLAMINIUS
  SERVILIUS
Other SERVANTS of Timon
APEMANTUS, a Cynic philosopher
ALCIBIADES, an Athenian Captain
His concubines:
  PHRYNIA
  TIMANDRA
SOLDIER of Alcibiades
SENATORS and LORDS of Athens
Friends of Timon:
  LUCIUS
  LUCULLUS
  SEMPRONIUS
  VENTIDIUS
Other FRIENDS of Timon
Servants of Timon's creditors:
  CAPHIS, servant to a Senator
  ISIDORE'S MAN
  VARRO'S two MEN
  TITUS
  LUCIUS' MAN
  HORTENSIUS
  PHILOTUS
A POET
A PAINTER
A JEWELER
A MERCHANT
An OLD ATHENIAN
FOOL
PAGE
Three STRANGERS, one called HOSTILIUS
BANDITTI, theives
"Cupid" and other Maskers (as Amazons)
Soldiers, Servants, Messengers, Attendants, Musicians


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Poet, Painter, Jeweler, and Merchant, at several
doors.]


POET  Good day, sir.

PAINTER  I am glad you're well.

POET
I have not seen you long. How goes the world?

PAINTER
It wears, sir, as it grows.

POET  Ay, that's well known.
But what particular rarity, what strange,
Which manifold record not matches? See,
Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power
Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.

PAINTER  I know them both. Th' other's a jeweler.

MERCHANT, [to Jeweler]
O, 'tis a worthy lord!

JEWELER  Nay, that's most fixed.

MERCHANT
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,
To an untirable and continuate goodness.
He passes.

JEWELER  I have a jewel here--

MERCHANT
O, pray, let's see 't. For the Lord Timon, sir?

JEWELER
If he will touch the estimate. But for that--

POET, [to Painter]
When we for recompense have praised the vile,
It stains the glory in that happy verse
Which aptly sings the good.

MERCHANT, [looking at the jewel]
'Tis a good form.

JEWELER  And rich. Here is a water, look ye.

PAINTER, [to Poet]
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
To the great lord.

POET  A thing slipped idly from me.
Our poesy is as a gum which oozes
From whence 'tis nourished. The fire i' th' flint
Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame
Provokes itself and, like the current, flies
Each bound it chases. What have you there?

PAINTER
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?

POET
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
Let's see your piece.

PAINTER  'Tis a good piece.

POET
So 'tis. This comes off well and excellent.

PAINTER
Indifferent.

POET  Admirable! How this grace
Speaks his own standing! What a mental power
This eye shoots forth! How big imagination
Moves in this lip! To th' dumbness of the gesture
One might interpret.

PAINTER
It is a pretty mocking of the life.
Here is a touch. Is 't good?

POET  I will say of it,
It tutors nature. Artificial strife
Lives in these touches livelier than life.

[Enter certain Senators.]


PAINTER  How this lord is followed.

POET
The senators of Athens, happy men.

PAINTER  Look, more.

POET
You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.
[(Indicating his poem.)] I have in this rough work
shaped out a man
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment. My free drift
Halts not particularly but moves itself
In a wide sea of wax. No leveled malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
Leaving no tract behind.

PAINTER  How shall I understand you?

POET  I will unbolt to you.
You see how all conditions, how all minds,
As well of glib and slipp'ry creatures as
Of grave and austere quality, tender down
Their services to Lord Timon. His large fortune,
Upon his good and gracious nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All sorts of hearts--yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loves better
Than to abhor himself; even he drops down
The knee before him and returns in peace
Most rich in Timon's nod.

PAINTER  I saw them speak together.

POET
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o' th' mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures
That labor on the bosom of this sphere
To propagate their states. Amongst them all
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Translates his rivals.

PAINTER  'Tis conceived to scope.
This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our condition.

POET  Nay, sir, but hear me on.
All those which were his fellows but of late,
Some better than his value, on the moment
Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
Drink the free air.

PAINTER  Ay, marry, what of these?

POET
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants,
Which labored after him to the mountain's top
Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.

PAINTER  'Tis common.
A thousand moral paintings I can show
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of
Fortune's
More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.

[Trumpets sound. Enter Lord Timon, addressing himself
courteously to every suitor. He is accompanied by a
Messenger and followed by Lucilius and other
Servants.]


TIMON  Imprisoned is he, say you?

MESSENGER
Ay, my good lord. Five talents is his debt,
His means most short, his creditors most strait.
Your honorable letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing
Periods his comfort.

TIMON  Noble Ventidius. Well,
I am not of that feather to shake off
My friend when he must need me. I do know him
A gentleman that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. I'll pay the debt and free him.

MESSENGER  Your Lordship ever binds him.

TIMON
Commend me to him. I will send his ransom;
And, being enfranchised, bid him come to me.
'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after. Fare you well.

MESSENGER  All happiness to your Honor.	[He exits.]

[Enter an old Athenian.]


OLD MAN
Lord Timon, hear me speak.

TIMON  Freely, good father.

OLD MAN
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.

TIMON  I have so. What of him?

OLD MAN
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.

TIMON
Attends he here or no?--Lucilius!

LUCILIUS  Here, at your Lordship's service.

OLD MAN
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an heir more raised
Than one which holds a trencher.

TIMON  Well. What further?

OLD MAN
One only daughter have I, no kin else
On whom I may confer what I have got.
The maid is fair, o' th' youngest for a bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love. I prithee, noble lord,
Join with me to forbid him her resort.
Myself have spoke in vain.

TIMON  The man is honest.

OLD MAN  Therefore he will be, Timon.
His honesty rewards him in itself;
It must not bear my daughter.

TIMON  Does she love him?

OLD MAN  She is young and apt.
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
What levity's in youth.

TIMON, [to Lucilius]  Love you the maid?

LUCILIUS
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.

OLD MAN
If in her marriage my consent be missing--
I call the gods to witness--I will choose
Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world
And dispossess her all.

TIMON  How shall she be endowed
If she be mated with an equal husband?

OLD MAN
Three talents on the present; in future, all.

TIMON
This gentleman of mine hath served me long.
To build his fortune, I will strain a little,
For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter.
What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
And make him weigh with her.

OLD MAN  Most noble lord,
Pawn me to this your honor, she is his.

TIMON
My hand to thee; mine honor on my promise.

LUCILIUS
Humbly I thank your Lordship. Never may
That state or fortune fall into my keeping
Which is not owed to you.
[He exits with the old Athenian.]

POET, [presenting his poem to Timon]
Vouchsafe my labor, and long live your Lordship.

TIMON
I thank you. You shall hear from me anon.
Go not away.--What have you there, my friend?

PAINTER
A piece of painting which I do beseech
Your Lordship to accept.

TIMON  Painting is welcome.
The painting is almost the natural man,
For, since dishonor traffics with man's nature,
He is but outside; these penciled figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it. Wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.

PAINTER  The gods preserve you.

TIMON
Well fare you, gentleman. Give me your hand.
We must needs dine together.--Sir, your jewel
Hath suffered under praise.

JEWELER  What, my lord? Dispraise?

TIMON
A mere satiety of commendations.
If I should pay you for 't as 'tis extolled,
It would unclew me quite.

JEWELER  My lord, 'tis rated
As those which sell would give. But you well know
Things of like value, differing in the owners,
Are prized by their masters. Believe 't, dear lord,
You mend the jewel by the wearing it.

TIMON  Well mocked.

MERCHANT
No, my good lord. He speaks the common tongue,
Which all men speak with him.

[Enter Apemantus.]


TIMON  Look who comes here. Will you be chid?

JEWELER  We'll bear, with your Lordship.

MERCHANT  He'll spare none.

TIMON
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus.

APEMANTUS
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow--
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.

TIMON
Why dost thou call them knaves? Thou know'st
them not.

APEMANTUS  Are they not Athenians?

TIMON  Yes.

APEMANTUS  Then I repent not.

JEWELER  You know me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Thou know'st I do. I called thee by thy
name.

TIMON  Thou art proud, Apemantus.

APEMANTUS  Of nothing so much as that I am not like
Timon.

TIMON  Whither art going?

APEMANTUS  To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.

TIMON  That's a deed thou 'lt die for.

APEMANTUS  Right, if doing nothing be death by th' law.

TIMON  How lik'st thou this picture, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  The best, for the innocence.

TIMON  Wrought he not well that painted it?

APEMANTUS  He wrought better that made the painter,
and yet he's but a filthy piece of work.

PAINTER  You're a dog.

APEMANTUS  Thy mother's of my generation. What's
she, if I be a dog?

TIMON  Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  No. I eat not lords.

TIMON  An thou shouldst, thou 'dst anger ladies.

APEMANTUS  O, they eat lords. So they come by great
bellies.

TIMON  That's a lascivious apprehension.

APEMANTUS  So thou apprehend'st it. Take it for thy
labor.

TIMON  How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Not so well as plain-dealing, which will
not cost a man a doit.

TIMON  What dost thou think 'tis worth?

APEMANTUS  Not worth my thinking.--How now, poet?

POET  How now, philosopher?

APEMANTUS  Thou liest.

POET  Art not one?

APEMANTUS  Yes.

POET  Then I lie not.

APEMANTUS  Art not a poet?

POET  Yes.

APEMANTUS  Then thou liest. Look in thy last work,
where thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.

POET  That's not feigned. He is so.

APEMANTUS  Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee
for thy labor. He that loves to be flattered is worthy
o' th' flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!

TIMON  What wouldst do then, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  E'en as Apemantus does now--hate a lord
with my heart.

TIMON  What? Thyself?

APEMANTUS  Ay.

TIMON  Wherefore?

APEMANTUS  That I had no angry wit to be a lord.--Art
not thou a merchant?

MERCHANT  Ay, Apemantus.

APEMANTUS  Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not.

MERCHANT  If traffic do it, the gods do it.

APEMANTUS  Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound
thee!

[Trumpet sounds. Enter a Messenger.]


TIMON  What trumpet's that?

MESSENGER
'Tis Alcibiades and some twenty horse,
All of companionship.

TIMON
Pray, entertain them. Give them guide to us.
[Some Servants exit with Messenger.]
You must needs dine with me. Go not you hence
Till I have thanked you.--When dinner's done
Show me this piece.--I am joyful of your sights.

[Enter Alcibiades with the rest.]

Most welcome, sir.	[They bow to each other.]

APEMANTUS, [apart]  So, so, there!
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
That there should be small love amongst these sweet
knaves,
And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
Into baboon and monkey.

ALCIBIADES, [to Timon]
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.

TIMON  Right welcome, sir.
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
[All but Apemantus exit.]

[Enter two Lords.]


FIRST LORD  What time o' day is 't, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Time to be honest.

FIRST LORD  That time serves still.

APEMANTUS
The most accursed thou, that still omit'st it.

SECOND LORD  Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?

APEMANTUS
Ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools.

SECOND LORD  Fare thee well, fare thee well.

APEMANTUS
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.

SECOND LORD  Why, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give
thee none.

FIRST LORD  Hang thyself.

APEMANTUS
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding.
Make thy requests to thy friend.

SECOND LORD
Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence.

APEMANTUS  I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' th' ass.
[He exits.]

FIRST LORD
He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in
And taste Lord Timon's bounty? He outgoes
The very heart of kindness.

SECOND LORD
He pours it out. Plutus, the god of gold,
Is but his steward. No meed but he repays
Sevenfold above itself. No gift to him
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
All use of quittance.

FIRST LORD  The noblest mind he carries
That ever governed man.

SECOND LORD
Long may he live in fortunes. Shall we in?
I'll keep you company.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet served
in, and then enter Lord Timon, the States, the Athenian
Lords (including Lucius), Alcibiades, and Ventidius
(which Timon redeemed from prison). Flavius and others
are in attendance. Then comes dropping after all
Apemantus discontentedly like himself.]


VENTIDIUS  Most honored Timon,
It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age
And call him to long peace.
He is gone happy and has left me rich.
Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those talents,
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.	[He offers a purse.]

TIMON  O, by no means,
Honest Ventidius. You mistake my love.
I gave it freely ever, and there's none
Can truly say he gives if he receives.
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them. Faults that are rich are fair.

VENTIDIUS  A noble spirit!

TIMON
Nay, my lords, ceremony was but devised at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
Pray, sit. More welcome are you to my fortunes
Than my fortunes to me.	[They sit.]

FIRST LORD  My lord, we always have confessed it.

APEMANTUS
Ho, ho, "confessed it"? Hanged it, have you not?

TIMON  O Apemantus, you are welcome.

APEMANTUS  No, you shall not make me welcome.
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

TIMON
Fie, thou 'rt a churl. You've got a humor there
Does not become a man. 'Tis much to blame.--
They say, my lords, Ira furor brevis est, but yond
man is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by
himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is
he fit for 't indeed.

APEMANTUS  Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon. I
come to observe; I give thee warning on 't.

TIMON  I take no heed of thee. Thou 'rt an Athenian,
therefore welcome. I myself would have no power;
prithee, let my meat make thee silent.

APEMANTUS  I scorn thy meat. 'Twould choke me, for I
should ne'er flatter thee. [(Apart.)] O you gods,
what a number of men eats Timon, and he sees 'em
not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in
one man's blood; and all the madness is, he cheers
them up too.
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
Methinks they should invite them without knives.
Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
There's much example for 't. The fellow that sits
next him, now parts bread with him, pledges the
breath of him in a divided draft, is the readiest
man to kill him. 'T 'as been proved. If I were a huge
man, I should fear to drink at meals,
Lest they should spy my wind-pipe's dangerous
notes.
Great men should drink with harness on their
throats.

TIMON, [responding to a toast]
My lord, in heart! And let the health go round.

SECOND LORD  Let it flow this way, my good lord.

APEMANTUS, [apart]  "Flow this way"? A brave fellow.
He keeps his tides well. Those healths will make
thee and thy state look ill, Timon.
Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which ne'er left man i' th' mire.
This and my food are equals. There's no odds.
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.

Apemantus' grace.

	Immortal gods, I crave no pelf.
	I pray for no man but myself.
	Grant I may never prove so fond
	To trust man on his oath or bond,
	Or a harlot for her weeping,
	Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,
	Or a keeper with my freedom,
	Or my friends if I should need 'em.
	Amen. So fall to 't.
	Rich men sin, and I eat root.
[He eats and drinks.]
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!

TIMON  Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.

ALCIBIADES  My heart is ever at your service, my lord.

TIMON  You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies
than a dinner of friends.

ALCIBIADES  So they were bleeding new, my lord,
there's no meat like 'em. I could wish my best
friend at such a feast.

APEMANTUS, [apart]  Would all those flatterers were
thine enemies, then, that then thou mightst kill
'em and bid me to 'em.

FIRST LORD  Might we but have that happiness, my
lord, that you would once use our hearts, whereby
we might express some part of our zeals, we
should think ourselves forever perfect.

TIMON  O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods
themselves have provided that I shall have much
help from you. How had you been my friends else?
Why have you that charitable title from thousands,
did not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told
more of you to myself than you can with modesty
speak in your own behalf. And thus far I confirm
you. O you gods, think I, what need we have any
friends if we should ne'er have need of 'em? They
were the most needless creatures living, should we
ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble
sweet instruments hung up in cases, that keeps
their sounds to themselves. Why, I have often
wished myself poorer that I might come nearer to
you. We are born to do benefits. And what better or
properer can we call our own than the riches of
our friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis to
have so many, like brothers, commanding one
another's fortunes. O, joy's e'en made away ere 't
can be born! Mine eyes cannot hold out water,
methinks. To forget their faults, I drink to you.

APEMANTUS, [apart]  Thou weep'st to make them drink,
Timon.

SECOND LORD
Joy had the like conception in our eyes
And, at that instant, like a babe sprung up.

APEMANTUS, [apart]
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.

THIRD LORD
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.

APEMANTUS, [apart]  Much!	[Sound tucket.]

TIMON  What means that trump?

[Enter Servant.]

How now?

SERVANT  Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies
most desirous of admittance.

TIMON  Ladies? What are their wills?

SERVANT  There comes with them a forerunner, my lord,
which bears that office to signify their pleasures.

TIMON  I pray, let them be admitted.	[Servant exits.]

[Enter "Cupid."]


CUPID
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
That of his bounties taste! The five best senses
Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
To gratulate thy plenteous bosom. There
Taste, touch, all, pleased from thy table rise;
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.

TIMON
They're welcome all. Let 'em have kind admittance.
Music, make their welcome!

LUCIUS
You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.

[Music. Enter the masque of Ladies as Amazons,
with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing.]


APEMANTUS, [apart]  Hoy-day!
What a sweep of vanity comes this way.
They dance? They are madwomen.
Like madness is the glory of this life
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves
And spend our flatteries to drink those men
Upon whose age we void it up again
With poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their friends' gift?
I should fear those that dance before me now
Would one day stamp upon me. 'T 'as been done.
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.

[The Lords rise from table, with much adoring of Timon,
and to show their loves each single out an Amazon, and
all dance, men with women, a lofty strain or two to the
hautboys, and cease.]



TIMON
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful and kind.
You have added worth unto 't and luster,
And entertained me with mine own device.
I am to thank you for 't.

FIRST LADY
My lord, you take us even at the best.

APEMANTUS, [apart]  Faith, for the worst is filthy and
would not hold taking, I doubt me.

TIMON
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you.
Please you to dispose yourselves.

ALL LADIES  Most thankfully, my lord.
[Cupid and Ladies exit.]

TIMON  Flavius.

FLAVIUS
My lord?

TIMON  The little casket bring me hither.

FLAVIUS  Yes, my lord. [(Aside.)] More jewels yet?
There is no crossing him in 's humor;
Else I should tell him well, i' faith I should.
When all's spent, he'd be crossed then, an he could.
'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
[He exits.]

FIRST LORD  Where be our men?

SERVANT  Here, my lord, in readiness.

SECOND LORD
Our horses.

[Enter Flavius, with the casket.]


TIMON  O my friends, I have one word
To say to you. Look you, my good lord,
I must entreat you, honor me so much
As to advance this jewel. Accept it and wear it,
Kind my lord.

FIRST LORD
I am so far already in your gifts--

ALL  So are we all.

[Enter a Servant.]


SERVANT
My lord, there are certain nobles of the Senate
Newly alighted and come to visit you.

TIMON
They are fairly welcome.	[Servant exits.]

FLAVIUS  I beseech your Honor,
Vouchsafe me a word. It does concern you near.

TIMON
Near? Why, then, another time I'll hear thee.
I prithee, let's be provided to show them
entertainment.

FLAVIUS, [aside]  I scarce know how.

[Enter another Servant.]


SECOND SERVANT
May it please your Honor, Lord Lucius,
Out of his free love, hath presented to you
Four milk-white horses trapped in silver.

TIMON
I shall accept them fairly. Let the presents
Be worthily entertained.	[Servant exits.]

[Enter a third Servant.]

How now? What news?

THIRD SERVANT  Please you, my lord, that honorable
gentleman Lord Lucullus entreats your company
tomorrow to hunt with him and has sent your
Honor two brace of greyhounds.

TIMON
I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,
Not without fair reward.	[Servant exits.]

FLAVIUS, [aside]  What will this come to?
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,
And all out of an empty coffer.
Nor will he know his purse or yield me this--
To show him what a beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state
That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes
For ev'ry word. He is so kind that he
Now pays interest for 't. His land's put to their books.
Well, would I were gently put out of office
Before I were forced out.
Happier is he that has no friend to feed
Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my lord.	[He exits.]

TIMON, [to Lords]  You do yourselves much wrong.
You bate too much of your own merits.
[(Offering a gift.)] Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.

SECOND LORD
With more than common thanks I will receive it.

THIRD LORD  O, he's the very soul of bounty!

TIMON  And now I remember, my lord, you gave good
words the other day of a bay courser I rode on. 'Tis
yours because you liked it.

FIRST LORD
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.

TIMON
You may take my word, my lord. I know no man
Can justly praise but what he does affect.
I weigh my friends' affection with mine own.
I'll tell you true, I'll call to you.

ALL LORDS  O, none so welcome.

TIMON
I take all and your several visitations
So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give.
Methinks I could deal kingdoms to my friends
And ne'er be weary.--Alcibiades,
Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich.
It comes in charity to thee, for all thy living
Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
Lie in a pitched field.

ALCIBIADES  Ay, defiled land, my lord.

FIRST LORD  We are so virtuously bound--

TIMON  And so am I to you.

SECOND LORD  So infinitely endeared--

TIMON  All to you.--Lights, more lights.

FIRST LORD
The best of happiness, honor, and fortunes
Keep with you, Lord Timon.

TIMON  Ready for his friends.
[All but Timon and Apemantus exit.]

APEMANTUS  What a coil's here,
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs.
Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.

TIMON
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen,
I would be good to thee.

APEMANTUS  No, I'll nothing, for if I should be bribed
too, there would be none left to rail upon thee, and
then thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou giv'st so
long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself
in paper shortly. What needs these feasts, pomps,
and vainglories?

TIMON  Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am
sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell, and
come with better music.	[He exits.]

APEMANTUS  So. Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt
not then. I'll lock thy heaven from thee.
O, that men's ears should be
To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
[He exits.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a Senator, with papers.]


SENATOR
And late five thousand. To Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five-and-twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste! It cannot hold; it will not.
If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
If I would sell my horse and buy twenty more
Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon--
Ask nothing; give it him--it foals me straight,
And able horses. No porter at his gate
But rather one that smiles and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold. No reason
Can sound his state in safety.--Caphis, ho!
Caphis, I say!

[Enter Caphis.]


CAPHIS  Here, sir. What is your pleasure?

SENATOR
Get on your cloak and haste you to Lord Timon.
Importune him for my moneys. Be not ceased
With slight denial, nor then silenced when
"Commend me to your master" and the cap
Plays in the right hand thus; but tell him
My uses cry to me. I must serve my turn
Out of mine own. His days and times are past,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit. I love and honor him
But must not break my back to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words
But find supply immediate. Get you gone.
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand, for I do fear
When every feather sticks in his own wing
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.

CAPHIS  I go, sir.

SENATOR
"I go, sir"? Take the bonds along with you
And have the dates in. Come.
[He hands Caphis papers.]

CAPHIS  I will, sir.

SENATOR  Go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Steward Flavius, with many bills in his hand.]


FLAVIUS
No care, no stop, so senseless of expense
That he will neither know how to maintain it
Nor cease his flow of riot. Takes no account
How things go from him nor resumes no care
Of what is to continue. Never mind
Was to be so unwise to be so kind.
What shall be done? He will not hear till feel.
I must be round with him, now he comes from
hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie!

[Enter Caphis, and the Men of Isidore and Varro.]


CAPHIS
Good even, Varro. What, you come for money?

VARRO'S MAN  Is 't not your business too?

CAPHIS  It is. And yours too, Isidore?

ISIDORE'S MAN  It is so.

CAPHIS  Would we were all discharged!

VARRO'S MAN  I fear it.

CAPHIS  Here comes the lord.

[Enter Timon, and his train, with Alcibiades.]


TIMON
So soon as dinner's done we'll forth again,
My Alcibiades. [(To Caphis.)] With me? What is your
will?

CAPHIS, [offering Timon a paper]
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.

TIMON  Dues? Whence are you?

CAPHIS  Of Athens here, my lord.

TIMON  Go to my steward.

CAPHIS
Please it your Lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month.
My master is awaked by great occasion
To call upon his own and humbly prays you
That with your other noble parts you'll suit
In giving him his right.

TIMON  Mine honest friend,
I prithee but repair to me next morning.

CAPHIS
Nay, good my lord--

TIMON  Contain thyself, good friend.

VARRO'S MAN, [offering a paper]  One Varro's servant,
my good lord--

ISIDORE'S MAN, [offering a paper]
From Isidore. He humbly prays your speedy
payment.

CAPHIS
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants--

VARRO'S MAN
'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks and past.

ISIDORE'S MAN
Your steward puts me off, my lord, and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.

TIMON  Give me breath.--
I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on.
I'll wait upon you instantly.
[Alcibiades and Timon's train exit.]
[To Flavius.] Come hither. Pray you,
How goes the world that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of debt, broken bonds,
And the detention of long-since-due debts
Against my honor?

FLAVIUS, [to the creditors' Men]  Please you, gentlemen,
The time is unagreeable to this business.
Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.

TIMON  Do so, my friends.--
See them well entertained.

FLAVIUS  Pray, draw near.
[Timon and Flavius exit.]

[Enter Apemantus and Fool.]


CAPHIS  Stay, stay, here comes the Fool with Apemantus.
Let's ha' some sport with 'em.

VARRO'S MAN  Hang him! He'll abuse us.

ISIDORE'S MAN  A plague upon him, dog!

VARRO'S MAN  How dost, Fool?

APEMANTUS  Dost dialogue with thy shadow?

VARRO'S MAN  I speak not to thee.

APEMANTUS  No, 'tis to thyself. [(To the Fool.)] Come
away.

ISIDORE'S MAN, [to Varro's Man]  There's the fool hangs
on your back already.

APEMANTUS  No, thou stand'st single; thou 'rt not on
him yet.

CAPHIS, [to Isidore's Man]  Where's the fool now?

APEMANTUS  He last asked the question. Poor rogues
and usurers' men, bawds between gold and want.

ALL THE MEN  What are we, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Asses.

ALL THE MEN  Why?

APEMANTUS  That you ask me what you are, and do not
know yourselves.--Speak to 'em, Fool.

FOOL  How do you, gentlemen?

ALL THE MEN  Gramercies, good Fool. How does your
mistress?

FOOL  She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens
as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!

APEMANTUS  Good. Gramercy.

[Enter Page.]


FOOL  Look you, here comes my master's page.

PAGE, [to Fool]  Why, how now, captain? What do you in
this wise company?--How dost thou, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Would I had a rod in my mouth that I
might answer thee profitably.

PAGE  Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription
of these letters. I know not which is which.
[He shows some papers.]

APEMANTUS  Canst not read?

PAGE  No.

APEMANTUS  There will little learning die, then, that
day thou art hanged. This is to Lord Timon, this to
Alcibiades. Go. Thou wast born a bastard, and
thou 'lt die a bawd.

PAGE  Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish
a dog's death. Answer not. I am gone.	[He exits.]

APEMANTUS  E'en so thou outrunn'st grace.--Fool, I
will go with you to Lord Timon's.

FOOL  Will you leave me there?

APEMANTUS  If Timon stay at home.--You three serve
three usurers?

ALL THE MEN  Ay. Would they served us!

APEMANTUS  So would I--as good a trick as ever hangman
served thief.

FOOL  Are you three usurers' men?

ALL THE MEN  Ay, fool.

FOOL  I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant.
My mistress is one, and I am her Fool. When men
come to borrow of your masters, they approach
sadly and go away merry, but they enter my master's
house merrily and go away sadly. The reason
of this?

VARRO'S MAN  I could render one.

APEMANTUS  Do it then, that we may account thee a
whoremaster and a knave, which notwithstanding,
thou shalt be no less esteemed.

VARRO'S MAN  What is a whoremaster, fool?

FOOL  A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
'Tis a spirit; sometime 't appears like a lord, sometime
like a lawyer, sometime like a philosopher,
with two stones more than 's artificial one. He is
very often like a knight, and generally in all shapes
that man goes up and down in from fourscore to
thirteen, this spirit walks in.

VARRO'S MAN  Thou art not altogether a Fool.

FOOL  Nor thou altogether a wise man. As much foolery
as I have, so much wit thou lack'st.

APEMANTUS  That answer might have become Apemantus.

ALL THE MEN  Aside, aside! Here comes Lord Timon.

[Enter Timon and Steward Flavius.]


APEMANTUS  Come with me, fool, come.

FOOL  I do not always follow lover, elder brother, and
woman; sometime the philosopher.
[Apemantus and the Fool exit.]

FLAVIUS, [to the creditors' Men]
Pray you, walk near. I'll speak with you anon.
[The Men exit.]

TIMON
You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.

FLAVIUS  You would not hear me.
At many leisures I proposed--

TIMON  Go to.
Perchance some single vantages you took
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse yourself.

FLAVIUS  O, my good lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you. You would throw them off
And say you found them in mine honesty.
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head and wept--
Yea, 'gainst th' authority of manners prayed you
To hold your hand more close. I did endure
Not seldom nor no slight checks when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
Though you hear now too late, yet now's a time.
The greatest of your having lacks a half
To pay your present debts.

TIMON  Let all my land be sold.

FLAVIUS
'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone,
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues. The future comes apace.
What shall defend the interim? And at length
How goes our reck'ning?

TIMON
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.

FLAVIUS
O my good lord, the world is but a word.
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone!

TIMON  You tell me true.

FLAVIUS
If you suspect my husbandry of falsehood,
Call me before th' exactest auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
When all our offices have been oppressed
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
Hath blazed with lights and brayed with minstrelsy,
I have retired me to a wasteful cock
And set mine eyes at flow.

TIMON  Prithee, no more.

FLAVIUS
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
This night englutted. Who is not Timon's?
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord
Timon's?
Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
The breath is gone whereof this praise is made.
Feast-won, fast-lost. One cloud of winter showers,
These flies are couched.

TIMON  Come, sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet hath passed my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack
To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart.
If I would broach the vessels of my love
And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use
As I can bid thee speak.

FLAVIUS  Assurance bless your thoughts!

TIMON
And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,
That I account them blessings. For by these
Shall I try friends. You shall perceive how you
Mistake my fortunes. I am wealthy in my friends.--
Within there! Flaminius!--Servilius!

[Enter three Servants, Flaminius, Servilius, and another.]


SERVANTS  My lord, my lord.

TIMON  I will dispatch you severally. [(To Servilius)]
You to Lord Lucius, [(to Flaminius)] to Lord
Lucullus you--I hunted with his Honor today; [(to
the third Servant)] you to Sempronius. Commend
me to their loves, and I am proud, say, that my
occasions have found time to use 'em toward a
supply of money. Let the request be fifty talents.

FLAMINIUS  As you have said, my lord.	[Servants exit.]

FLAVIUS, [aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Humh!

TIMON  Go you, sir, to the Senators,
Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
Deserved this hearing. Bid 'em send o' th' instant
A thousand talents to me.

FLAVIUS  I have been bold--
For that I knew it the most general way--
To them to use your signet and your name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.

TIMON  Is 't true? Can 't be?

FLAVIUS
They answer in a joint and corporate voice
That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
Do what they would, are sorry. You are honorable,
But yet they could have wished--they know not--
Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
May catch a wrench--would all were well--'tis pity.
And so, intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
They froze me into silence.

TIMON  You gods, reward them!
Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;
'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventidius. Prithee, be not sad.
Thou art true and honest--ingeniously I speak--
No blame belongs to thee. Ventidius lately
Buried his father, by whose death he's stepped
Into a great estate. When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,
I cleared him with five talents. Greet him from me.
Bid him suppose some good necessity
Touches his friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five talents. That had, give 't these fellows
To whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak or think
That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
[He exits.]

FLAVIUS  I would I could not think it.
That thought is bounty's foe;
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Flaminius waiting to speak with Lucullus,
from his master.]

[Enter a Servant to him.]


SERVANT  I have told my lord of you. He is coming
down to you.

FLAMINIUS  I thank you, sir.

[Enter Lucullus.]


SERVANT  Here's my lord.

LUCULLUS, [aside]  One of Lord Timon's men? A gift, I
warrant. Why, this hits right. I dreamt of a silver
basin and ewer tonight.--Flaminius, honest
Flaminius, you are very respectively welcome, sir.
[(To Servant.)] Fill me some wine.	[(Servant exits.)]
And how does that honorable, complete, free-hearted
gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful
good lord and master?

FLAMINIUS  His health is well, sir.

LUCULLUS  I am right glad that his health is well, sir.
And what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty
Flaminius?

FLAMINIUS  Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir, which
in my lord's behalf I come to entreat your Honor
to supply; who, having great and instant occasion
to use fifty talents, hath sent to your Lordship to
furnish him, nothing doubting your present assistance
therein.

LUCULLUS  La, la, la, la. "Nothing doubting" says he?
Alas, good lord! A noble gentleman 'tis, if he would
not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I
ha' dined with him and told him on 't, and come
again to supper to him of purpose to have him
spend less, and yet he would embrace no counsel,
take no warning by my coming. Every man has his
fault, and honesty is his. I ha' told him on 't, but I
could ne'er get him from 't.

[Enter Servant with wine.]


SERVANT  Please your Lordship, here is the wine.

LUCULLUS  Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Here's to thee.	[He drinks.]

FLAMINIUS  Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.

LUCULLUS  I have observed thee always for a towardly
prompt spirit--give thee thy due--and one that
knows what belongs to reason and canst use the
time well, if the time use thee well. Good parts in
thee.--Get you gone, sirrah.	[Servant exits.]
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a bountiful
gentleman, but thou art wise and thou
know'st well enough, although thou com'st to me,
that this is no time to lend money, especially upon
bare friendship, without security. Here's three solidares
for thee. [(Gives him money.)] Good boy,
wink at me, and say thou saw'st me not. Fare thee
well.

FLAMINIUS
Is 't possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
To him that worships thee!
[He throws the money back at Lucullus.]

LUCULLUS  Ha! Now I see thou art a fool and fit for thy
master.	[Lucullus exits.]

FLAMINIUS
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart
It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
I feel my master's passion. This slave
Unto his honor has my lord's meat in him.
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment
When he is turned to poison?
O, may diseases only work upon 't,
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of
nature
Which my lord paid for be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lucius, with three Strangers.]


LUCIUS  Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good
friend and an honorable gentleman.

FIRST STRANGER  We know him for no less, though we
are but strangers to him. But I can tell you one
thing, my lord, and which I hear from common
rumors: now Lord Timon's happy hours are done
and past, and his estate shrinks from him.

LUCIUS  Fie, no, do not believe it. He cannot want for
money.

SECOND STRANGER  But believe you this, my lord, that
not long ago one of his men was with the Lord
Lucullus to borrow fifty talents, nay, urged
extremely for 't, and showed what necessity
belonged to 't, and yet was denied.

LUCIUS  How?

SECOND STRANGER  I tell you, denied, my lord.

LUCIUS  What a strange case was that! Now, before the
gods, I am ashamed on 't. Denied that honorable
man? There was very little honor showed in 't. For
my own part, I must needs confess I have received
some small kindnesses from him, as money, plate,
jewels, and suchlike trifles, nothing comparing to
his; yet had he mistook him and sent to me, I
should ne'er have denied his occasion fifty talents.

[Enter Servilius.]


SERVILIUS, [aside]  See, by good hap, yonder's my lord.
I have sweat to see his Honor. [To Lucius.] My
honored lord.

LUCIUS  Servilius. You are kindly met, sir. Fare thee
well. Commend me to thy honorable virtuous lord,
my very exquisite friend.	[He turns to exit.]

SERVILIUS  May it please your Honor, my lord hath
sent--

LUCIUS  Ha! What has he sent? I am so much endeared
to that lord; he's ever sending. How shall I thank
him, think'st thou? And what has he sent now?

SERVILIUS  Has only sent his present occasion now, my
lord, requesting your Lordship to supply his
instant use with fifty talents.

LUCIUS
I know his Lordship is but merry with me.
He cannot want fifty-five hundred talents.

SERVILIUS
But in the meantime he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.

LUCIUS
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?

SERVILIUS  Upon my soul, 'tis true, sir.

LUCIUS  What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish
myself against such a good time, when I might ha'
shown myself honorable! How unluckily it happened
that I should purchase the day before for a
little part, and undo a great deal of honor! Servilius,
now before the gods, I am not able to do--the
more beast, I say!--I was sending to use Lord
Timon myself, these gentlemen can witness; but I
would not for the wealth of Athens I had done 't
now. Commend me bountifully to his good Lordship,
and I hope his Honor will conceive the fairest
of me, because I have no power to be kind. And tell
him this from me: I count it one of my greatest
afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an honorable
gentleman. Good Servilius, will you
befriend me so far as to use mine own words to
him?

SERVILIUS  Yes, sir, I shall.

LUCIUS  I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
[Servilius exits.]
True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
[He exits.]

FIRST STRANGER  Do you observe this, Hostilius?

SECOND STRANGER  Ay, too well.

FIRST STRANGER
Why, this is the world's soul, and just of the same
piece
Is every flatterer's sport. Who can call him his friend
That dips in the same dish? For, in my knowing,
Timon has been this lord's father
And kept his credit with his purse,
Supported his estate, nay, Timon's money
Has paid his men their wages. He ne'er drinks
But Timon's silver treads upon his lip.
And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--
He does deny him, in respect of his,
What charitable men afford to beggars.

THIRD STRANGER
Religion groans at it.

FIRST STRANGER  For mine own part,
I never tasted Timon in my life,
Nor came any of his bounties over me
To mark me for his friend. Yet I protest,
For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,
And honorable carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into donation,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart. But I perceive
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
For policy sits above conscience.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a Third Servant of Timon's with Sempronius,
another of Timon's friends.]


SEMPRONIUS
Must he needs trouble me in 't? Hum! 'Bove all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemed from prison. All these
Owes their estates unto him.

SERVANT  My lord,
They have all been touched and found base metal,
For they have all denied him.

SEMPRONIUS  How? Have they denied him?
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him,
And does he send to me? Three? Humh!
It shows but little love or judgment in him.
Must I be his last refuge? His friends, like physicians,
Thrive, give him over. Must I take th' cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in 't. I'm angry at him
That might have known my place. I see no sense for 't
But his occasions might have wooed me first;
For, in my conscience, I was the first man
That e'er received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now
That I'll requite it last? No.
So it may prove an argument of laughter
To th' rest, and I 'mongst lords be thought a fool.
I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,
And with their faint reply this answer join:
Who bates mine honor shall not know my coin.
[He exits.]

SERVANT  Excellent! Your Lordship's a goodly villain.
The devil knew not what he did when he made
man politic. He crossed himself by 't, and I cannot
think but, in the end, the villainies of man will set
him clear. How fairly this lord strives to appear
foul! Takes virtuous copies to be wicked, like those
that under hot ardent zeal would set whole realms
on fire.
Of such a nature is his politic love.
This was my lord's best hope. Now all are fled,
Save only the gods. Now his friends are dead,
Doors that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
Many a bounteous year must be employed
Now to guard sure their master.
And this is all a liberal course allows:
Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Varro's two Men, meeting Titus and others, all
being Men of Timon's creditors to wait for his coming
out. Then enter Lucius' Man and Hortensius.]


VARRO'S FIRST MAN
Well met. Good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.

TITUS
The like to you, kind Varro.

HORTENSIUS  Lucius!
What, do we meet together?

LUCIUS' MAN  Ay, and I think
One business does command us all,
For mine is money.

TITUS  So is theirs and ours.

[Enter Philotus.]


LUCIUS' MAN
And, sir, Philotus' too.

PHILOTUS  Good day at once.

LUCIUS' MAN  Welcome, good brother.
What do you think the hour?

PHILOTUS  Laboring for nine.

LUCIUS' MAN
So much?

PHILOTUS  Is not my lord seen yet?

LUCIUS' MAN  Not yet.

PHILOTUS
I wonder on 't. He was wont to shine at seven.

LUCIUS' MAN
Ay, but the days are waxed shorter with him.
You must consider that a prodigal course
Is like the sun's,
But not, like his, recoverable. I fear
'Tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse:
That is, one may reach deep enough and yet
Find little.

PHILOTUS  I am of your fear for that.

TITUS
I'll show you how t' observe a strange event.
Your lord sends now for money?

HORTENSIUS  Most true, he does.

TITUS
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
For which I wait for money.

HORTENSIUS  It is against my heart.

LUCIUS' MAN  Mark how strange it shows:
Timon in this should pay more than he owes,
And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels
And send for money for 'em.

HORTENSIUS
I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness.
I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.

VARRO'S FIRST MAN
Yes, mine's three thousand crowns. What's yours?

LUCIUS' MAN  Five thousand mine.

VARRO'S FIRST MAN
'Tis much deep, and it should seem by th' sum
Your master's confidence was above mine,
Else surely his had equaled.

[Enter Flaminius.]


TITUS  One of Lord Timon's men.

LUCIUS' MAN  Flaminius? Sir, a word. Pray, is my lord
ready to come forth?

FLAMINIUS  No, indeed he is not.

TITUS  We attend his Lordship. Pray, signify so much.

FLAMINIUS  I need not tell him that. He knows you are
too diligent.	[He exits.]

[Enter Flavius, the Steward in a cloak, muffled.]


LUCIUS' MAN
Ha! Is not that his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud. Call him, call him.

TITUS  Do you hear, sir?

VARRO'S SECOND MAN  By your leave, sir.

FLAVIUS  What do you ask of me, my friend?

TITUS
We wait for certain money here, sir.

FLAVIUS  Ay,
If money were as certain as your waiting,
'Twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills
When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
And take down th' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up.
Let me pass quietly.
Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end.
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

LUCIUS' MAN  Ay, but this answer will not serve.

FLAVIUS
If 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you,
For you serve knaves.	[He exits.]

VARRO'S FIRST MAN  How? What does his cashiered
Worship mutter?

VARRO'S SECOND MAN  No matter what. He's poor, and
that's revenge enough. Who can speak broader
than he that has no house to put his head in? Such
may rail against great buildings.

[Enter Servilius.]


TITUS  O, here's Servilius. Now we shall know some
answer.

SERVILIUS  If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair
some other hour, I should derive much from 't. For
take 't of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to discontent.
His comfortable temper has forsook him.
He's much out of health and keeps his chamber.

LUCIUS' MAN
Many do keep their chambers are not sick;
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts
And make a clear way to the gods.

SERVILIUS  Good gods!

TITUS  We cannot take this for answer, sir.

FLAMINIUS, [within]  Servilius, help! My lord, my lord!

[Enter Timon in a rage.]


TIMON
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive enemy, my jail?
The place which I have feasted, does it now,
Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?

LUCIUS' MAN  Put in now, Titus.

TITUS  My lord, here is my bill.

LUCIUS' MAN  Here's mine.

HORTENSIUS  And mine, my lord.

VARRO'S SECOND MAN  And ours, my lord.

PHILOTUS  All our bills.

TIMON
Knock me down with 'em! Cleave me to the girdle.

LUCIUS' MAN  Alas, my lord--

TIMON  Cut my heart in sums!

TITUS  Mine, fifty talents.

TIMON  Tell out my blood.

LUCIUS' MAN  Five thousand crowns, my lord.

TIMON
Five thousand drops pays that.--What yours?--And
yours?

VARRO'S FIRST MAN  My lord--

VARRO'S SECOND MAN  My lord--

TIMON
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
[Timon exits.]

HORTENSIUS  Faith, I perceive our masters may throw
their caps at their money. These debts may well be
called desperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
[They exit.]

[Enter Timon and Flavius.]


TIMON
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves!
Creditors? Devils!

FLAVIUS  My dear lord--

TIMON  What if it should be so?

FLAVIUS  My lord--

TIMON
I'll have it so.--My steward!

FLAVIUS  Here, my lord.

TIMON
So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius, all.
I'll once more feast the rascals.

FLAVIUS  O my lord,
You only speak from your distracted soul.
There's not so much left to furnish out
A moderate table.

TIMON  Be it not in thy care. Go,
I charge thee, invite them all. Let in the tide
Of knaves once more. My cook and I'll provide.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter three Senators at one door, Alcibiades meeting
them, with Attendants.]


FIRST SENATOR, [to the Second Senator]
My lord, you have my voice to 't. The fault's
Bloody. 'Tis necessary he should die.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

SECOND SENATOR  Most true. The law shall bruise 'em.

ALCIBIADES
Honor, health, and compassion to the Senate!

FIRST SENATOR  Now, captain?

ALCIBIADES
I am an humble suitor to your virtues,
For pity is the virtue of the law,
And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
Upon a friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath stepped into the law, which is past depth
To those that without heed do plunge into 't.
He is a man--setting his fate aside--
Of comely virtues.
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
An honor in him which buys out his fault--
But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
Seeing his reputation touched to death,
He did oppose his foe;
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,
As if he had but proved an argument.

FIRST SENATOR
You undergo too strict a paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair.
Your words have took such pains as if they labored
To bring manslaughter into form and set quarreling
Upon the head of valor--which indeed
Is valor misbegot, and came into the world
When sects and factions were newly born.
He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breathe
And make his wrongs his outsides,
To wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart
To bring it into danger.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!

ALCIBIADES
My lord--

FIRST SENATOR  You cannot make gross sins look clear.
To revenge is no valor, but to bear.

ALCIBIADES
My lords, then, under favor, pardon me
If I speak like a captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle
And not endure all threats? Sleep upon 't,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such valor in the bearing, what make we
Abroad? Why, then, women are more valiant
That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon
Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,
As you are great, be pitifully good.
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust,
But in defense, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety,
But who is man that is not angry?
Weigh but the crime with this.

SECOND SENATOR  You breathe in vain.

ALCIBIADES  In vain? His service done
At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
Were a sufficient briber for his life.

FIRST SENATOR  What's that?

ALCIBIADES
Why, I say, my lords, has done fair service
And slain in fight many of your enemies.
How full of valor did he bear himself
In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!

SECOND SENATOR
He has made too much plenty with 'em.
He's a sworn rioter. He has a sin
That often drowns him and takes his valor prisoner.
If there were no foes, that were enough
To overcome him. In that beastly fury,
He has been known to commit outrages
And cherish factions. 'Tis inferred to us
His days are foul and his drink dangerous.

FIRST SENATOR
He dies.

ALCIBIADES  Hard fate! He might have died in war.
My lords, if not for any parts in him--
Though his right arm might purchase his own time
And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
Take my deserts to his and join 'em both.
And, for I know your reverend ages love
Security, I'll pawn my victories, all
My honor, to you, upon his good returns.
If by this crime he owes the law his life,
Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore,
For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

FIRST SENATOR
We are for law. He dies. Urge it no more,
On height of our displeasure. Friend or brother,
He forfeits his own blood that spills another.

ALCIBIADES  Must it be so? It must not be.
My lords, I do beseech you, know me.

SECOND SENATOR  How?

ALCIBIADES  Call me to your remembrances.

THIRD SENATOR  What?

ALCIBIADES
I cannot think but your age has forgot me.
It could not else be I should prove so base
To sue and be denied such common grace.
My wounds ache at you.

FIRST SENATOR  Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:
We banish thee forever.

ALCIBIADES  Banish me?
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
That makes the Senate ugly!

FIRST SENATOR
If after two days' shine Athens contain thee,
Attend our weightier judgment.
And, not to swell our spirit,
He shall be executed presently.	[Senators exit.]

ALCIBIADES
Now the gods keep you old enough that you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you!--
I'm worse than mad. I have kept back their foes
While they have told their money and let out
Their coin upon large interest, I myself
Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
Is this the balsam that the usuring Senate
Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment.
It comes not ill. I hate not to be banished.
It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
My discontented troops and lay for hearts.
'Tis honor with most lands to be at odds.
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
[He exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Music. Enter divers Friends at several doors.]


FIRST FRIEND  The good time of day to you, sir.

SECOND FRIEND  I also wish it to you. I think this honorable
lord did but try us this other day.

FIRST FRIEND  Upon that were my thoughts tiring when
we encountered. I hope it is not so low with him as
he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.

SECOND FRIEND  It should not be, by the persuasion of
his new feasting.

FIRST FRIEND  I should think so. He hath sent me an
earnest inviting, which many my near occasions
did urge me to put off; but he hath conjured me
beyond them, and I must needs appear.

SECOND FRIEND  In like manner was I in debt to my
importunate business, but he would not hear my
excuse. I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me,
that my provision was out.

FIRST FRIEND  I am sick of that grief too, as I understand
how all things go.

SECOND FRIEND  Every man here's so. What would he
have borrowed of you?

FIRST FRIEND  A thousand pieces.

SECOND FRIEND  A thousand pieces!

FIRST FRIEND  What of you?

SECOND FRIEND  He sent to me, sir--

[Enter Timon and Attendants.]

Here he comes.

TIMON  With all my heart, gentlemen both! And how
fare you?

FIRST FRIEND  Ever at the best, hearing well of your
Lordship.

SECOND FRIEND  The swallow follows not summer
more willing than we your Lordship.

TIMON, [aside]  Nor more willingly leaves winter, such
summer birds are men.--Gentlemen, our dinner
will not recompense this long stay. Feast your ears
with the music awhile, if they will fare so harshly
o' th' trumpets' sound. We shall to 't presently.

FIRST FRIEND  I hope it remains not unkindly with your
Lordship that I returned you an empty messenger.

TIMON  O, sir, let it not trouble you.

SECOND FRIEND  My noble lord--

TIMON  Ah, my good friend, what cheer?

SECOND FRIEND  My most honorable lord, I am e'en
sick of shame that when your Lordship this other
day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a beggar.

TIMON  Think not on 't, sir.

SECOND FRIEND  If you had sent but two hours before--

TIMON  Let it not cumber your better remembrance.

[The banquet brought in.]


Come, bring in all together.

SECOND FRIEND  All covered dishes!

FIRST FRIEND  Royal cheer, I warrant you.

THIRD FRIEND  Doubt not that, if money and the season
can yield it.

FIRST FRIEND  How do you? What's the news?

THIRD FRIEND  Alcibiades is banished. Hear you of it?

FIRST AND SECOND FRIENDS  Alcibiades banished?

THIRD FRIEND  'Tis so. Be sure of it.

FIRST FRIEND  How? How?

SECOND FRIEND  I pray you, upon what?

TIMON  My worthy friends, will you draw near?

THIRD FRIEND  I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble
feast toward.

SECOND FRIEND  This is the old man still.

THIRD FRIEND  Will 't hold? Will 't hold?

SECOND FRIEND  It does, but time will--and so--

THIRD FRIEND  I do conceive.

TIMON  Each man to his stool, with that spur as he
would to the lip of his mistress. Your diet shall
be in all places alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let
the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place.
Sit, sit. [(They sit.)] The gods require our thanks:

You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with
thankfulness. For your own gifts make yourselves
praised, but reserve still to give, lest your deities be
despised. Lend to each man enough, that one need
not lend to another; for, were your godheads to
borrow of men, men would forsake the gods. Make
the meat be beloved more than the man that gives
it. Let no assembly of twenty be without a score of
villains. If there sit twelve women at the table, let a
dozen of them be as they are. The rest of your fees,
O gods, the Senators of Athens, together with the
common tag of people, what is amiss in them,
you gods, make suitable for destruction. For these
my present friends, as they are to me nothing, so
in nothing bless them, and to nothing are they
welcome.

Uncover, dogs, and lap.
[The dishes are uncovered. They contain
only water and stones.]

SOME SPEAK  What does his Lordship mean?

SOME OTHER  I know not.

TIMON
May you a better feast never behold,
You knot of mouth-friends! Smoke and lukewarm
water
Is your perfection. This is Timon's last,
Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
Washes it off and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villainy. [(He throws water in their
faces.)] Live loathed and long,
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,
Cap-and-knee slaves, vapors, and minute-jacks.
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Crust you quite o'er! [(They stand.)] What, dost thou
go?
Soft! Take thy physic first--thou too--and thou.--
Stay. I will lend thee money, borrow none.
[He attacks them and forces them out.]
What? All in motion? Henceforth be no feast
Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn, house! Sink, Athens! Henceforth hated be
Of Timon man and all humanity!	[He exits.]

[Enter Timon's Friends, the Senators, with other Lords.]


FIRST FRIEND  How now, my lords?

SECOND FRIEND  Know you the quality of Lord Timon's
fury?

THIRD FRIEND  Push! Did you see my cap?

FOURTH FRIEND  I have lost my gown.

FIRST FRIEND  He's but a mad lord, and naught but
humors sways him. He gave me a jewel th' other
day, and now he has beat it out of my hat. Did you
see my jewel?

SECOND FRIEND  Did you see my cap?

THIRD FRIEND  Here 'tis.

FOURTH FRIEND  Here lies my gown.

FIRST FRIEND  Let's make no stay.

SECOND FRIEND
Lord Timon's mad.

THIRD FRIEND  I feel 't upon my bones.

FOURTH FRIEND
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.
[The Senators and the others exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Timon.]


TIMON
Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall
That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth
And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience fail in children! Slaves and fools,
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the bench
And minister in their steads! To general filths
Convert o' th' instant, green virginity!
Do 't in your parents' eyes! Bankrupts, hold fast!
Rather than render back, out with your knives
And cut your trusters' throats! Bound servants, steal!
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed!
Thy mistress is o' th' brothel. Son of sixteen,
Pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire;
With it beat out his brains! Piety and fear,
Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
Domestic awe, night rest, and neighborhood,
Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,
Degrees, observances, customs, and laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries,
And yet confusion live! Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious fevers heap
On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,
Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their manners! Lust and liberty,
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive
And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
Sow all th' Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
That their society, as their friendship, may
Be merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable town!
Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
Th' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all!--
Th' Athenians both within and out that wall,
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of mankind, high and low!
Amen.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Steward Flavius with two or three Servants.]


FIRST SERVANT
Hear you, Master Steward, where's our master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?

FLAVIUS
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
I am as poor as you.

FIRST SERVANT  Such a house broke?
So noble a master fall'n, all gone, and not
One friend to take his fortune by the arm
And go along with him?

SECOND SERVANT  As we do turn our backs
From our companion thrown into his grave,
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self,
A dedicated beggar to the air,
With his disease of all-shunned poverty,
Walks, like contempt, alone.

[Enter other Servants.]

More of our fellows.

FLAVIUS
All broken implements of a ruined house.

THIRD SERVANT
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery.
That see I by our faces. We are fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow. Leaked is our bark,
And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
Hearing the surges threat. We must all part
Into this sea of air.

FLAVIUS  Good fellows all,
The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake
Let's yet be fellows. Let's shake our heads and say,
As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
"We have seen better days." [(He offers them
money.)] Let each take some.
Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more.
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
[The Servants embrace and part several ways.]
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since riches point to misery and contempt?
Who would be so mocked with glory, or to live
But in a dream of friendship,
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
But only painted, like his varnished friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
Undone by goodness! Strange unusual blood
When man's worst sin is he does too much good!
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, do still mar men.
My dearest lord, blest to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!
He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat
Of monstrous friends,
Nor has he with him to supply his life,
Or that which can command it.
I'll follow and inquire him out.
I'll ever serve his mind with my best will.
Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Timon in the woods, with a spade.]


TIMON
O blessed breeding sun, draw from the Earth
Rotten humidity! Below thy sister's orb
Infect the air! Twinned brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth
Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser. Not nature,
To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune
But by contempt of nature.
Raise me this beggar, and deny 't that lord;
The Senators shall bear contempt hereditary,
The beggar native honor.
It is the pasture lards the brother's sides,
The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who
dares
In purity of manhood stand upright
And say "This man's a flatterer"? If one be,
So are they all, for every grise of fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool. All's obliquy.
There's nothing level in our cursed natures
But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred
All feasts, societies, and throngs of men.
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains.
Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots!
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant poison! [(Digging, he finds
gold.)] What is here?
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious gold?
No, gods, I am no idle votarist.
Roots, you clear heavens! Thus much of this will
make
Black white, foul fair, wrong right,
Base noble, old young, coward valiant.
Ha, you gods! Why this? What this, you gods? Why,
this
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads.
This yellow slave
Will knit and break religions, bless th' accursed,
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
And give them title, knee, and approbation
With senators on the bench. This is it
That makes the wappened widow wed again;
She whom the spital house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To th' April day again. Come, damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that puts odds
Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
Do thy right nature. [(March afar off.)] Ha? A drum?
Thou 'rt quick,
But yet I'll bury thee. Thou 'lt go, strong thief,
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
[He buries the gold, keeping some out.]

[Enter Alcibiades, with Drum and Fife, in warlike
manner, and Phrynia and Timandra.]


ALCIBIADES  What art thou there? Speak.

TIMON
A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart
For showing me again the eyes of man!

ALCIBIADES
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee
That art thyself a man?

TIMON
I am Misanthropos and hate mankind.
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
That I might love thee something.

ALCIBIADES  I know thee well.
But in thy fortunes am unlearned and strange.

TIMON
I know thee too, and more than that I know thee
I not desire to know. Follow thy drum.
With man's blood paint the ground gules, gules!
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel.
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine
Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
For all her cherubin look.

PHRYNIA  Thy lips rot off!

TIMON
I will not kiss thee. Then the rot returns
To thine own lips again.

ALCIBIADES
How came the noble Timon to this change?

TIMON
As the moon does, by wanting light to give.
But then renew I could not, like the moon;
There were no suns to borrow of.

ALCIBIADES
Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?

TIMON
None, but to maintain my opinion.

ALCIBIADES  What is it, Timon?

TIMON  Promise me friendship, but perform none. If
thou wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for
thou art a man. If thou dost perform, confound
thee, for thou art a man.

ALCIBIADES
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.

TIMON
Thou saw'st them when I had prosperity.

ALCIBIADES
I see them now. Then was a blessed time.

TIMON
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.

TIMANDRA
Is this th' Athenian minion whom the world
Voiced so regardfully?

TIMON  Art thou Timandra?

TIMANDRA  Yes.

TIMON
Be a whore still. They love thee not that use thee.
Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Make use of thy salt hours. Season the slaves
For tubs and baths. Bring down rose-cheeked youth
To the tub-fast and the diet.

TIMANDRA  Hang thee, monster!

ALCIBIADES
Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his calamities.--
I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof doth daily make revolt
In my penurious band. I have heard and grieved
How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds when neighbor states,
But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them--

TIMON
I prithee, beat thy drum and get thee gone.

ALCIBIADES
I am thy friend and pity thee, dear Timon.

TIMON
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
I had rather be alone.

ALCIBIADES
Why, fare thee well. Here is some gold for thee.

TIMON  Keep it. I cannot eat it.

ALCIBIADES
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap--

TIMON
Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?

ALCIBIADES  Ay, Timon, and have cause.

TIMON
The gods confound them all in thy conquest,
And thee after, when thou hast conquered!

ALCIBIADES
Why me, Timon?

TIMON  That by killing of villains
Thou wast born to conquer my country.
Put up thy gold. Go on. Here's gold. Go on.
Be as a planetary plague when Jove
Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
In the sick air. Let not thy sword skip one.
Pity not honored age for his white beard;
He is an usurer. Strike me the counterfeit matron;
It is her habit only that is honest,
Herself's a bawd. Let not the virgin's cheek
Make soft thy trenchant sword, for those milk paps,
That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible traitors. Spare not the
babe,
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their
mercy;
Think it a bastard whom the oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against objects;
Put armor on thine ears and on thine eyes,
Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot. [(He offers gold.)] There's gold to
pay thy soldiers.
Make large confusion and, thy fury spent,
Confounded be thyself! Speak not. Begone.

ALCIBIADES
Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me,
Not all thy counsel.

TIMON
Dost thou or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!

BOTH WOMEN
Give us some gold, good Timon. Hast thou more?

TIMON
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
And to make whores a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,
Your aprons mountant. [(He begins throwing gold
into their aprons.)] You are not oathable,
Although I know you'll swear--terribly swear
Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
Th' immortal gods that hear you. Spare your oaths.
I'll trust to your conditions. Be whores still.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up.
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turncoats. Yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary. And thatch your poor thin roofs
With burdens of the dead--some that were hanged,
No matter; wear them, betray with them. Whore
still.
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face.
A pox of wrinkles!

BOTH WOMEN  Well, more gold. What then?
Believe 't that we'll do anything for gold.

TIMON  Consumptions sow
In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,
And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,
That he may never more false title plead
Nor sound his quillets shrilly. Hoar the flamen,
That scolds against the quality of flesh
And not believes himself. Down with the nose--
Down with it flat, take the bridge quite away--
Of him that, his particular to foresee,
Smells from the general weal. Make curled-pate
ruffians bald,
And let the unscarred braggarts of the war
Derive some pain from you. Plague all,
That your activity may defeat and quell
The source of all erection. There's more gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all!

BOTH WOMEN
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.

TIMON
More whore, more mischief first! I have given you
earnest.

ALCIBIADES
Strike up the drum towards Athens.--Farewell,
Timon.
If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.

TIMON
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.

ALCIBIADES  I never did thee harm.

TIMON
Yes, thou spok'st well of me.

ALCIBIADES  Call'st thou that harm?

TIMON
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
Thy beagles with thee.

ALCIBIADES, [to the Women]  We but offend him.--
Strike.	[The drum sounds; all but Timon exit.]

TIMON
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,
Should yet be hungry! [(He digs.)] Common mother,
thou
Whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast
Teems and feeds all; whose selfsame mettle--
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puffed--
Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
The gilded newt and eyeless venomed worm,
With all th' abhorred births below crisp heaven
Whereon Hyperion's quick'ning fire doth shine:
Yield him who all thy human sons do hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
Let it no more bring out ingrateful man.
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;
Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the marbled mansion all above
Never presented. O, a root! Dear thanks!
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plow-torn leas,
Whereof ingrateful man with liquorish drafts
And morsels unctuous greases his pure mind,
That from it all consideration slips--

[Enter Apemantus.]

More man? Plague, plague!

APEMANTUS
I was directed hither. Men report
Thou dost affect my manners and dost use them.

TIMON
'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee!

APEMANTUS
This is in thee a nature but infected,
A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
From change of future. Why this spade? This place?
This slavelike habit and these looks of care?
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou 'lt observe
Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus.
Thou gav'st thine ears, like tapsters that bade
welcome,
To knaves and all approachers. 'Tis most just
That thou turn rascal. Had'st thou wealth again,
Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.

TIMON
Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.

APEMANTUS
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself--
A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels
And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook,
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste
To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
Whose naked natures live in all the spite
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements exposed,
Answer mere nature. Bid them flatter thee.
O, thou shalt find--

TIMON  A fool of thee. Depart.

APEMANTUS
I love thee better now than e'er I did.

TIMON
I hate thee worse.

APEMANTUS  Why?

TIMON  Thou flatter'st misery.

APEMANTUS
I flatter not but say thou art a caitiff.

TIMON  Why dost thou seek me out?

APEMANTUS  To vex thee.

TIMON
Always a villain's office or a fool's.
Dost please thyself in 't?

APEMANTUS  Ay.

TIMON  What, a knave too?

APEMANTUS
If thou didst put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well, but thou
Dost it enforcedly. Thou 'dst courtier be again
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
Outlives incertain pomp, is crowned before;
The one is filling still, never complete,
The other at high wish. Best state, contentless,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse than the worst, content.
Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.

TIMON
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
Thou art a slave whom Fortune's tender arm
With favor never clasped but bred a dog.
Hadst thou, like us from our first swathe, proceeded
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged
thyself
In general riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of lust, and never learned
The icy precepts of respect, but followed
The sugared game before thee. But myself--
Who had the world as my confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of
men
At duty, more than I could frame employment,
That numberless upon me stuck as leaves
Do on the oak, have with one winter's brush
Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare,
For every storm that blows--I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden.
Thy nature did commence in sufferance. Time
Hath made thee hard in 't. Why shouldst thou hate
men?
They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
To some she-beggar and compounded thee
Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, begone.
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.

APEMANTUS
Art thou proud yet?

TIMON  Ay, that I am not thee.

APEMANTUS  I, that I was no prodigal.

TIMON  I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I'd give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
That the whole life of Athens were in this!
Thus would I eat it.	[He gnaws a root.]

APEMANTUS, [offering food]  Here, I will mend thy feast.

TIMON
First mend my company. Take away thyself.

APEMANTUS
So I shall mend mine own by th' lack of thine.

TIMON
'Tis not well mended so; it is but botched.
If not, I would it were.

APEMANTUS  What wouldst thou have to Athens?

TIMON
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
Tell them there I have gold. Look, so I have.

APEMANTUS
Here is no use for gold.

TIMON  The best and truest,
For here it sleeps and does no hired harm.

APEMANTUS  Where liest a-nights, Timon?

TIMON  Under that's above me. Where feed'st thou
a-days, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS  Where my stomach finds meat, or rather
where I eat it.

TIMON  Would poison were obedient and knew my
mind!

APEMANTUS  Where wouldst thou send it?

TIMON  To sauce thy dishes.

APEMANTUS  The middle of humanity thou never
knewest, but the extremity of both ends. When
thou wast in thy gilt and thy perfume, they
mocked thee for too much curiosity. In thy rags
thou know'st none, but art despised for the contrary.
There's a medlar for thee. Eat it.

TIMON  On what I hate I feed not.

APEMANTUS  Dost hate a medlar?

TIMON  Ay, though it look like thee.

APEMANTUS  An thou 'dst hated meddlers sooner, thou
shouldst have loved thyself better now. What man
didst thou ever know unthrift that was beloved
after his means?

TIMON  Who, without those means thou talk'st of, didst
thou ever know beloved?

APEMANTUS  Myself.

TIMON  I understand thee. Thou hadst some means to
keep a dog.

APEMANTUS  What things in the world canst thou nearest
compare to thy flatterers?

TIMON  Women nearest, but men--men are the things
themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world,
Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?

APEMANTUS  Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

TIMON  Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion
of men and remain a beast with the beasts?

APEMANTUS  Ay, Timon.

TIMON  A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee
t' attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would
beguile thee. If thou wert the lamb, the fox would
eat thee. If thou wert the fox, the lion would suspect
thee when peradventure thou wert accused by
the ass. If thou wert the ass, thy dullness would
torment thee, and still thou lived'st but as a breakfast
to the wolf. If thou wert the wolf, thy greediness
would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst hazard
thy life for thy dinner. Wert thou the unicorn,
pride and wrath would confound thee and
make thine own self the conquest of thy fury. Wert
thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse.
Wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the
leopard. Wert thou a leopard, thou wert germane
to the lion, and the spots of thy kindred were
jurors on thy life. All thy safety were remotion, and
thy defense absence. What beast couldst thou be
that were not subject to a beast? And what a beast
art thou already that seest not thy loss in
transformation!

APEMANTUS  If thou couldst please me with speaking to
me, thou mightst have hit upon it here. The commonwealth
of Athens is become a forest of beasts.

TIMON  How, has the ass broke the wall that thou art
out of the city?

APEMANTUS  Yonder comes a poet and a painter. The
plague of company light upon thee! I will fear to
catch it and give way. When I know not what else
to do, I'll see thee again.

TIMON  When there is nothing living but thee, thou
shalt be welcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog
than Apemantus.

APEMANTUS
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.

TIMON
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!

APEMANTUS
A plague on thee! Thou art too bad to curse.

TIMON
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.

APEMANTUS
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.

TIMON  If I name thee.
I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.

APEMANTUS  I would my tongue could rot them off!

TIMON
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
Choler does kill me that thou art alive.
I swoon to see thee.

APEMANTUS
Would thou wouldst burst!

TIMON  Away, thou tedious rogue!
I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.
[Timon throws a stone at Apemantus.]

APEMANTUS  Beast!

TIMON  Slave!

APEMANTUS  Toad!

TIMON  Rogue, rogue, rogue!
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
But even the mere necessities upon 't.
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave.
Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
Thy gravestone daily. Make thine epitaph,
That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
[(To his gold.)] O thou sweet king-killer and dear
divorce
'Twixt natural son and sire, thou bright defiler
Of Hymen's purest bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou ever young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
That lies on Dian's lap; thou visible god,
That sold'rest close impossibilities
And mak'st them kiss, that speak'st with every
tongue
To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slave, man, rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
May have the world in empire!

APEMANTUS  Would 'twere so!
But not till I am dead. I'll say thou 'st gold;
Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.

TIMON  Thronged to?

APEMANTUS  Ay.

TIMON
Thy back, I prithee.

APEMANTUS  Live and love thy misery.

TIMON  Long live so, and so die. I am quit.

[Enter the Banditti.]


APEMANTUS
More things like men.--Eat, Timon, and abhor
them.	[Apemantus exits.]

FIRST BANDIT  Where should he have this gold? It is
some poor fragment, some slender ort of his
remainder. The mere want of gold and the falling-from
of his friends drove him into this melancholy.

SECOND BANDIT  It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.

THIRD BANDIT  Let us make the assay upon him. If he
care not for 't, he will supply us easily. If he covetously
reserve it, how shall 's get it?

SECOND BANDIT  True, for he bears it not about him. 'Tis
hid.

FIRST BANDIT  Is not this he?

OTHERS  Where?

SECOND BANDIT  'Tis his description.

THIRD BANDIT  He. I know him.

ALL  Save thee, Timon.

TIMON  Now, thieves?

ALL
Soldiers, not thieves.

TIMON  Both, too, and women's sons.

ALL
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.

TIMON
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots.
Within this mile break forth a hundred springs.
The oaks bear mast, the briars scarlet hips.
The bounteous huswife Nature on each bush
Lays her full mess before you. Want? Why want?

FIRST BANDIT
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
As beasts and birds and fishes.

TIMON
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds and fishes;
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
That you are thieves professed, that you work not
In holier shapes, for there is boundless theft
In limited professions. Rascal thieves,
Here's gold. [(He gives them gold.)] Go, suck the
subtle blood o' th' grape
Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
And so 'scape hanging. Trust not the physician;
His antidotes are poison, and he slays
More than you rob. Take wealth and lives together.
Do, villainy, do, since you protest to do 't,
Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.
The sun's a thief and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea. The moon's an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun.
The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The moon into salt tears. The earth's a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n
From gen'ral excrement. Each thing's a thief.
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Has unchecked theft. Love not yourselves. Away!
Rob one another. There's more gold. [(He gives them
gold.)] Cut throats.
All that you meet are thieves. To Athens go.
Break open shops. Nothing can you steal
But thieves do lose it. Steal less for this I give you,
And gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.

THIRD BANDIT  Has almost charmed me from my profession
by persuading me to it.

FIRST BANDIT  'Tis in the malice of mankind that he
thus advises us, not to have us thrive in our
mystery.

SECOND BANDIT  I'll believe him as an enemy and give
over my trade.

FIRST BANDIT  Let us first see peace in Athens. There is
no time so miserable but a man may be true.
[Thieves exit.]

[Enter Flavius the Steward, to Timon.]


FLAVIUS  O you gods!
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
Full of decay and flailing? O, monument
And wonder of good deeds evilly bestowed!
What an alteration of honor has desp'rate want
made!
What viler thing upon the Earth than friends,
Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
When man was wished to love his enemies!
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me than those that do!
Has caught me in his eye. I will present
My honest grief unto him and as my lord
Still serve him with my life.--My dearest master.

TIMON
Away! What art thou?

FLAVIUS  Have you forgot me, sir?

TIMON
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then, if thou grant'st thou 'rt a man, I have forgot
thee.

FLAVIUS  An honest poor servant of yours.

TIMON  Then I know thee not.
I never had honest man about me, I. All
I kept were knaves to serve in meat to villains.

FLAVIUS  The gods are witness,
Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
[He weeps.]

TIMON
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer, then. I love
thee
Because thou art a woman and disclaim'st
Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
But thorough lust and laughter. Pity's sleeping.
Strange times that weep with laughing, not with
weeping!

FLAVIUS
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,
T' accept my grief, and, whilst this poor wealth lasts,
To entertain me as your steward still.
[He offers money.]

TIMON  Had I a steward
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.
Let me behold thy face. Surely this man
Was born of woman.
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
You perpetual-sober gods. I do proclaim
One honest man--mistake me not, but one;
No more, I pray!--and he's a steward.
How fain would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem'st thyself. But all, save thee,
I fell with curses.
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise,
For by oppressing and betraying me
Thou mightst have sooner got another service;
For many so arrive at second masters
Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true--
For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure--
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
A usuring kindness, and as rich men deal gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?

FLAVIUS
No, my most worthy master, in whose breast
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late.
You should have feared false times when you did
feast.
Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
Duty, and zeal to your unmatched mind,
Care of your food and living. And believe it,
My most honored lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope or present, I'd exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me by making rich yourself.

TIMON
Look thee, 'tis so. Thou singly honest man,
Here, take. [(Timon offers gold.)] The gods out of my
misery
Has sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: thou shalt build from men;
Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
But let the famished flesh slide from the bone
Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs
What thou deniest to men; let prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither 'em to nothing; be men like blasted
woods,
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
And so farewell and thrive.

FLAVIUS  O, let me stay
And comfort you, my master.

TIMON  If thou hat'st curses,
Stay not. Fly whilst thou art blest and free.
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Poet and Painter.]


PAINTER  As I took note of the place, it cannot be far
where he abides.

POET  What's to be thought of him? Does the rumor
hold for true that he's so full of gold?

PAINTER  Certain. Alcibiades reports it. Phrynia and
Timandra had gold of him. He likewise enriched
poor straggling soldiers with great quantity. 'Tis
said he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.

POET  Then this breaking of his has been but a try for
his friends?

PAINTER  Nothing else. You shall see him a palm in
Athens again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him in
this supposed distress of his. It will show honestly
in us and is very likely to load our purposes with
what they travail for, if it be a just and true report
that goes of his having.

[Enter Timon, behind them, from his cave.]


POET  What have you now to present unto him?

PAINTER  Nothing at this time but my visitation. Only I
will promise him an excellent piece.

POET  I must serve him so too--tell him of an intent
that's coming toward him.

PAINTER  Good as the best. Promising is the very air o'
th' time; it opens the eyes of expectation. Performance
is ever the duller for his act, and but in the
plainer and simpler kind of people the deed of saying
is quite out of use. To promise is most courtly
and fashionable. Performance is a kind of will or
testament which argues a great sickness in his
judgment that makes it.

TIMON, [aside]  Excellent workman! Thou canst not
paint a man so bad as is thyself.

POET  I am thinking what I shall say I have provided
for him. It must be a personating of himself, a
satire against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery
of the infinite flatteries that follow youth
and opulency.

TIMON, [aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain in
thine own work? Wilt thou whip thine own faults
in other men? Do so. I have gold for thee.

POET  Nay, let's seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate
When we may profit meet and come too late.

PAINTER  True.
When the day serves, before black-cornered night,
Find what thou want'st by free and offered light.
Come.

TIMON, [aside]
I'll meet you at the turn. What a god's gold
That he is worshiped in a baser temple
Than where swine feed!
'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plow'st the foam,
Settlest admired reverence in a slave.
To thee be worship, and thy saints for aye
Be crowned with plagues, that thee alone obey!
Fit I meet them.	[He comes forward.]

POET
Hail, worthy Timon.

PAINTER  Our late noble master.

TIMON
Have I once lived to see two honest men?

POET  Sir,
Having often of your open bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
Whose thankless natures--O, abhorred spirits!
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough--
What, to you,
Whose starlike nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
With any size of words.

TIMON
Let it go naked. Men may see 't the better.
You that are honest, by being what you are
Make them best seen and known.

PAINTER  He and myself
Have travailed in the great shower of your gifts
And sweetly felt it.

TIMON  Ay, you are honest men.

PAINTER
We are hither come to offer you our service.

TIMON
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
Can you eat roots and drink cold water? No?

BOTH
What we can do we'll do to do you service.

TIMON
You're honest men. You've heard that I have gold.
I am sure you have. Speak truth. You're honest men.

PAINTER
So it is said, my noble lord, but therefor
Came not my friend nor I.

TIMON
Good honest men. [(To the Painter.)] Thou draw'st a
counterfeit
Best in all Athens. Thou 'rt indeed the best.
Thou counterfeit'st most lively.

PAINTER  So-so, my lord.

TIMON
E'en so, sir, as I say. [(To the Poet.)] And for thy
fiction,
Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
That thou art even natural in thine art.
But for all this, my honest-natured friends,
I must needs say you have a little fault.
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.

BOTH  Beseech your Honor
To make it known to us.

TIMON  You'll take it ill.

BOTH  Most thankfully, my lord.

TIMON  Will you indeed?

BOTH  Doubt it not, worthy lord.

TIMON
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave
That mightily deceives you.

BOTH  Do we, my lord?

TIMON
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom. Yet remain assured
That he's a made-up villain.

PAINTER  I know none such, my lord.

POET  Nor I.

TIMON
Look you, I love you well. I'll give you gold.
Rid me these villains from your companies,
Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draft,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
I'll give you gold enough.

BOTH  Name them, my lord, let 's know them.

TIMON
You that way and you this, but two in company.
Each man apart, all single and alone,
Yet an archvillain keeps him company.
[(To one.)] If where thou art, two villains shall not be,
Come not near him. [(To the other.)] If thou wouldst
not reside
But where one villain is, then him abandon.--
Hence, pack. There's gold. You came for gold, you
slaves.
[(To one.)] You have work for me. There's payment.
Hence.
[(To the other.)] You are an alchemist; make gold of
that.
Out, rascal dogs!
[Timon drives them out and then exits.]

[Enter Steward Flavius, and two Senators.]


FLAVIUS
It is vain that you would speak with Timon,
For he is set so only to himself
That nothing but himself which looks like man
Is friendly with him.

FIRST SENATOR  Bring us to his cave.
It is our part and promise to th' Athenians
To speak with Timon.

SECOND SENATOR  At all times alike
Men are not still the same. 'Twas time and griefs
That framed him thus. Time, with his fairer hand
Offering the fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him. Bring us to him,
And chance it as it may.

FLAVIUS  Here is his cave.--
Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!
Look out, and speak to friends. Th' Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee.
Speak to them, noble Timon.

[Enter Timon out of his cave.]


TIMON
Thou sun that comforts, burn!--Speak and be
hanged!
For each true word a blister, and each false
Be as a cauterizing to the root o' th' tongue,
Consuming it with speaking.

FIRST SENATOR  Worthy Timon--

TIMON
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.

FIRST SENATOR
The Senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.

TIMON
I thank them and would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.

FIRST SENATOR  O, forget
What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The Senators with one consent of love
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special dignities which vacant lie
For thy best use and wearing.

SECOND SENATOR  They confess
Toward thee forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public body, which doth seldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itself
A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,
Together with a recompense more fruitful
Than their offense can weigh down by the dram--
Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Ever to read them thine.

TIMON  You witch me in it,
Surprise me to the very brink of tears.
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

FIRST SENATOR
Therefore, so please thee to return with us
And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks;
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Live with authority. So soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades th' approaches wild,
Who like a boar too savage doth root up
His country's peace.

SECOND SENATOR  And shakes his threat'ning sword
Against the walls of Athens.

FIRST SENATOR  Therefore, Timon--

TIMON
Well sir, I will. Therefore I will, sir, thus:
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon--
That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens
And take our goodly aged men by th' beards,
Giving our holy virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it
In pity of our aged and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not,
And let him take 't at worst--for their knives care not,
While you have throats to answer. For myself,
There's not a whittle in th' unruly camp
But I do prize it at my love before
The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous gods
As thieves to keepers.

FLAVIUS, [to Senators]  Stay not. All's in vain.

TIMON
Why, I was writing of my epitaph.
It will be seen tomorrow. My long sickness
Of health and living now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still.
Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
And last so long enough!

FIRST SENATOR  We speak in vain.

TIMON
But yet I love my country and am not
One that rejoices in the common wrack,
As common bruit doth put it.

FIRST SENATOR  That's well spoke.

TIMON
Commend me to my loving countrymen.

FIRST SENATOR
These words become your lips as they pass through
them.

SECOND SENATOR
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
In their applauding gates.

TIMON  Commend me to them
And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do
them.
I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.

FIRST SENATOR, [to Second Senator]
I like this well. He will return again.

TIMON
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
From high to low throughout, that whoso please
To stop affliction, let him take his haste,
Come hither ere my tree hath felt the ax,
And hang himself. I pray you, do my greeting.

FLAVIUS, [to Senators]
Trouble him no further. Thus you still shall find him.

TIMON
Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
Who once a day with his embossed froth
The turbulent surge shall cover. Thither come
And let my gravestone be your oracle.
Lips, let four words go by and language end.
What is amiss, plague and infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, and death their gain.
Sun, hide thy beams. Timon hath done his reign.
[Timon exits.]

FIRST SENATOR
His discontents are unremovably
Coupled to nature.

SECOND SENATOR
Our hope in him is dead. Let us return
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril.

FIRST SENATOR  It requires swift foot.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter two other Senators, with a Messenger.]


THIRD SENATOR
Thou hast painfully discovered. Are his files
As full as thy report?

MESSENGER  I have spoke the least.
Besides, his expedition promises
Present approach.

FOURTH SENATOR
We stand much hazard if they bring not Timon.

MESSENGER
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend,
Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force
And made us speak like friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timon's cave
With letters of entreaty which imported
His fellowship i' th' cause against your city,
In part for his sake moved.

[Enter the other Senators.]


THIRD SENATOR  Here come our brothers.

FIRST SENATOR
No talk of Timon; nothing of him expect.
The enemy's drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the air with dust. In, and prepare.
Ours is the fall, I fear, our foe's the snare.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a Soldier in the woods, seeking Timon.]


SOLDIER
By all description this should be the place.
Who's here? Speak, ho! No answer? What is this?
[He reads an epitaph.]
Timon is dead, who hath out-stretched his span.
Some beast read this; there does not live a man.
Dead, sure, and this his grave. What's on this tomb
I cannot read. The character I'll take with wax.
Our captain hath in every figure skill,
An aged interpreter, though young in days.
Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Trumpets sound. Enter Alcibiades with his Powers
before Athens.]


ALCIBIADES
Sound to this coward and lascivious town
Our terrible approach.	[Sounds a parley.]

[The Senators appear upon the walls.]

Till now you have gone on and filled the time
With all licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of justice. Till now myself and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our traversed arms and breathed
Our sufferance vainly. Now the time is flush,
When crouching marrow in the bearer strong
Cries of itself "No more!" Now breathless wrong
Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
And pursy insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.

FIRST SENATOR  Noble and young,
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee to give thy rages balm,
To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
Above their quantity.

SECOND SENATOR  So did we woo
Transformed Timon to our city's love
By humble message and by promised means.
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.

FIRST SENATOR  These walls of ours
Were not erected by their hands from whom
You have received your grief, nor are they such
That these great towers, trophies, and schools
should fall
For private faults in them.

SECOND SENATOR  Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out.
Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess
Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
Into our city with thy banners spread.
By decimation and a tithed death,
If thy revenges hunger for that food
Which nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth
And, by the hazard of the spotted die,
Let die the spotted.

FIRST SENATOR  All have not offended.
For those that were, it is not square to take,
On those that are, revenge. Crimes, like lands,
Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
Bring in thy ranks but leave without thy rage.
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended. Like a shepherd
Approach the fold and cull th' infected forth,
But kill not all together.

SECOND SENATOR  What thou wilt,
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
Than hew to 't with thy sword.

FIRST SENATOR  Set but thy foot
Against our rampired gates and they shall ope,
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before
To say thou 'lt enter friendly.

SECOND SENATOR  Throw thy glove,
Or any token of thine honor else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
And not as our confusion, all thy powers
Shall make their harbor in our town till we
Have sealed thy full desire.

ALCIBIADES  Then there's my glove.
Descend and open your uncharged ports.
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
Fall, and no more. And to atone your fears
With my more noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter or offend the stream
Of regular justice in your city's bounds
But shall be remedied to your public laws
At heaviest answer.

BOTH  'Tis most nobly spoken.

ALCIBIADES  Descend and keep your words.
[The Senators descend.]

[Enter a Soldier, with the wax tablet.]


SOLDIER
My noble general, Timon is dead,
Entombed upon the very hem o' th' sea,
And on his gravestone this insculpture, which
With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.

ALCIBIADES [reads the epitaph.]
Here lies a wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft.
Seek not my name. A plague consume you, wicked
caitiffs left!
Here lie I, Timon, who, alive, all living men did hate.
Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not here
thy gait.
These well express in thee thy latter spirits.
Though thou abhorred'st in us our human griefs,
Scorned'st our brains' flow and those our droplets
which
From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is noble Timon, of whose memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
And I will use the olive with my sword,
Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make
each
Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
Let our drums strike.
[Drums. They exit.]